<url>https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/sittings/1901/jun/7</url>
HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Friday, 7th June, 1901.
PRIVATE BILL BUSINESS.
PRIVATE BILLS [LORDS] (STANDING ORDERS NOT PREVIOUSLY INQUIRED INTO COMPLIED WITH).
Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table Report from one of the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills, That, in the case of the following Bills, originating in the Lords, and referred on the First Reading thereof, the Standing Orders not previously inquired into, and which are applicable thereto, have been complied with, viz.:;
Chester Corporation Tramways Bill [Lords].
Portmadoc, Beddgelert, and South Snowdon Railway Bill [Lords].
South Essex Water Bill [Lords].
Chesterfield Improvement Bill [Lords].
Lynton and Barnstaple Railway Bill [Lords].
Birmingham (City) Tramways Bill [Lords].
Broadstairs and St. Peter's Water and Improvement Bill [Lords].
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill [Lords].
St. Bartholomew's Hospital Bill [Lords].
Rodgers' Patent Bill [Lords].
Tyneside Tramways and Tramroads Bill [Lords].
South Lancashire Tramways Bill [Lords].
Wigan Corporation Tramways, &amp;c. Bill [Lords].
Leeds Corporation (General Powers) Bill [Lords].
Poulton-le-Fylde Gas Bill [Lords].
Southport Water (Transfer) Bill [Lords].
London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway Bill [Lords].
Faversham Water Bill [Lords].
South Western and Isle of Wight Junction Railway Bill [Lords].
Handsworth Urban District Council Bill [Lords].
Ordered, That the Bills be read a second time.
PROVISIONAL ORDER BILLS (STANDING ORDERS APPLICABLE THERETO COMPLIED WITH).
Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table Report from one of the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills, That, in the case of the following Bills, referred on the First Reading thereof, the Standing Orders which are applicable thereto have been complied with, viz.:;
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 7) Bill.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 9) Bill.
Local Government Provisional Order (No. 11) Bill.
Local Government (Ireland) Provisional Orders (No. 5) Bill.
Local Government (Ireland) Provisional Orders (Housing of the Working Classes) Bill.
Local Government (Ireland) Provisional Order (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill.
Local Government (Ireland) Provisional Orders (No. 4) Bill.
Ordered, That the Bills be read a second time upon Monday next.
PROVISIONAL ORDER BILLS (NO STANDING ORDERS APPLICABLE).
Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table Report from one of the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills, That, in the case of the following Bills, referred on the First Reading thereof, no Standing Orders are applicable, viz.:;
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 8) Bill.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 12) Bill.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 10) Bill.
Local Government Provisional Order (Port) Bill.
Local Government (Ireland) Provisional Order (No. 3) Bill.
Naval Works Provisional Order Bill.
Ordered, That the Bills be read a second time upon Monday next.
ALERETON GAS BILL [Lords].
Read the third time, and passed, with Amendments.
CAMBRIAN RAILWAYS BILL.
Read the third time, and passed. [New Title.]
CLYDE VALLEY ELECTRICAL POWER BILL.
King's consent signified; read the third time, and passed.
MOND GAS BILL.
Read the third time, and passed.
OMAGH GAS BILL [Lords].
Read the third time, and passed, with Amendments.
TORRINGTON AND OKEHAMPTON RAILWAY BILL.
Read the third time, and passed.
BLACKPOOL IMPROVEMENT BILL.
BRADFORD CORPORATION BILL.
As amended, considered; to be read the third time.
WEST CUMBERLAND ELECTRIC TRAMWAYS BILL.
As amended, considered; to be read the third time.
LOCH LEVEN WATER POWER BILL.
Read a second time, and committed.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) PROVISIONAL ORDER (No 2) BILL.
Read the third time, and passed.
BLACKBURN CORPORATION BILL.
Reported, with Amendments, Report to lie upon the Table, and to be printed.
PETITIONS.
AGRICULTURAL RATES ACT, 1896.
Petition from Lesmahagow, against re-enactment; to lie upon the Table.
BEER BILL.
Petition from Tunbridge Wells, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
BOROUGH FUNDS ACT (1872) AMENDMENT (LONDON) BILL.
Petition from Hackney, in favour, to lie upon the Table.
CHURCH DISCIPLINE.
Petition from Heighington, for alteration of Law; to lie upon the Table.
COAL MINES (EMPLOYMENT) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Wakefield; and Wet Earth Colliery; to lie upon the Table.
EDUCATION (YOUNG CHILDREN SCHOOL ATTENDANCE) (SCOTLAND) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Dundee; and Glasgow; to lie upon the Table.
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION (HIGHER GRADE AND EVENING CONTINUATION SCHOOLS).
Petitions for alteration of Law, from Association of School Boards (England and Wales); and Bradford; to lie upon the Table.
HOUSING OF WORKING CLASSES (REPAYMENT OF LOANS) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Aberystwith; and Woolwich; to lie upon the Table.
LAND RATING (ENGLAND AND WALES) BILL.
Petition from Battersea, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
MINES (EIGHT HOURS) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Wet Earth Colliery; and Wakefield; to lie upon the Table.
OFFICERS OF THE INDIAN STAFF CORPS.
Petitions for redress of grievances, from M. E. O'Donoghue; H. V. Firth; F. F. Hunter; St. George L. Steele; F. J. Moberley; J. Talbot; and L. D. Watling; to lie upon the Table.
REGISTRATION OF CLUBS BILL.
Petition from Battersea, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS ON SUNDAY BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Long Sutton; Mawgaw; Wilsford (two); Sleaford; Formby; and Peterborough (two); to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN BILL.
Petitions against, from Leeds; Leicester; and Ilkeston (two); to lie upon the Table.
Petitions in favour, from Lincoln; Normanton; Hayling Island; Swinton; Shrewsbury; Long Sutton; Charlton Adam; Salisbury (five); New Romney; Marden; Hamstreet; Heckmondwike; Manchester; Brierley Hill; Great Malvern; Hastings; Mansfield; Lydd; Thornaby; Heckmondwike (four); Chorley (four); Wakefield (two); Droitwich (two); Rochester (fourteen); Strood (five); Liskeard (five); Borstal (two); Norristhorpe; Dunlop; Liver-sedge; Harrow Green; Lampeter; Lyminge; Pendlebury; Tyldesley; Nottingham; Peterborough (two); Wilton; Farnworth (two); Donhead St. Andrews; Bowerchalke; Bodenham; Houghton-le-Spring; Long Eaton; Southport; Cornsay Colly; Preston; Newton-le-Willows; Erdington; Ashton-in-Makerfield; and Hapton; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN (SCOTLAND) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Wishaw; St. Mungo; Dalton; Elgin; Tyrie; and New Byth; to lie upon the Table.
SOVEREIGN'S OATH ON ACCESSION BILL.
Petition from Hackney, against; to lie upon the Table.
RETURNS, REPORTS, ETC.
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT.
Return presented, relative thereto [Address 16th May; Mr. Lloyd Morgan]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 197.]
SOUTH AFRICA.
Copy presented, of Report of the Transvaal Concessions Commission, dated the 19th April, 1901 [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
Copy presented, of Report of the Land Settlement Commission, South Africa, dated the 28th November, 1900 [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
Copy presented, of Report by Sir David Barbour, K.C.S.I., K.C.M.G., on the Finances of the Transvaal and the Orange River Colony, dated 29th March, 1901 [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
ARMY (MILITARY SAVINGS BANKS).
Copy presented, of Statement of the Amounts due by the Public to Depositors on 31st March, 1899, and of the Receipts, Interest, and Disbursements during the year ended 31st March, 1900, etc. [by Act]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 198.]
TRADE REPORTS (ANNUAL SERIES).
Copies presented, of Diplomatic and Consular Reports, Annual Series, Nos. 2614 to 2620 [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
TRADE REPORTS (MISCELLANEOUS SERIES).
Copies presented, of Diplomatic and Consular Reports, Miscellaneous Series, Nos. 553 and 554 [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE (IRELAND).
Copy ordered, "of Account of the Receipts and Payments of the Accountant General of the Supreme Court of Judicature in Ireland, in respect of the Funds of Suitors in the said Court, including therein Funds to the credit of Lunacy Accounts in the year to the 30th day of September, 1900, together with a Statement of Liabilities and Assets, and Particulars of Securities in Court on the 30th day of September, 1900.";(Mr. Austen Chamberlain.)
QUESTIONS.
SOUTH AFRICAN WAR;WILTSHIRE VOLUNTEER SERVICE COMPANY.
MR. FULLER (Wiltshire, Westbury): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he is aware that certain stoppages have been made from the war gratuity due to the members of the Wiltshire Volunteer Service Company, and whether he will take steps to remedy the grievance complained of.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR WAR (Mr. BRODRICK, Guildford): The War Office intimated to the members of the Service Company of Wiltshire Volunteers on 27th May that no refund of pay would be claimed from them; a furlough of thirty days being given to cover the issue in question.
BOER KILLED AND WOUNDED.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS (Carnarvonshire, Eifion): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether, seeing that Lord Kitchener's reports state that between 31st January and 12th May 307 Boers were killed and 149 wounded, he can give any explanation of the disproportion of Boers killed to those wounded.
MR. BRODRICK: The Boers carry away their wounded, and we cannot tell how many are wounded.
TRIALS OF ALLEGED REBELS;EXCLUSION OF REPORTERS.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he is aware that the military authorities at Barkley East excluded the reporter of the South African News from the trials of alleged rebels before the special Statutory Court by refusing to renew his permit to remain at Barkley East; and seeing that the South African News was the only paper that fully reported the proceedings of the courts, will he direct the permit to be renewed.
MR. BRODRICK: Full reports of these treason trials will be found in the files of the South African News. The question of the permit is one for the military authorities in South Africa, and I see no reason for interfering with their action.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS: Will the right hon. Gentleman inform me whether the permit was taken from this reporter, and whether, in consequence, he was unable to be present during a portion of the inquiry?
MR. BRODRICK: I cannot answer that, I can only tell the hon. Member the fact that reports of the trial are in the paper.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS: Is the right hon. Gentleman not aware that the reports only appeared till the permit was withdrawn, and could not then appear any longer?
MR. BRODRICK: I am not aware.
MILITARY CONVICTS;CONFINEMENT IN CIVIL PRISONS.
MR. LAMBERT (Devonshire, South Molton): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether any men convicted of military offences in South Africa are in civil convict prisons; whether any sentences have been passed by which such men are herded with ordinary convicts and felons; if so, will he state the number of men upon whom such punishments are inflicted.
MR. SPEAR (Devonshire, Tavistock): Perhaps the right hon. Gentleman will at the same time say if there are any men from the front in South Africa committed to Dartmoor prison for sleeping while on duty; and, if so, could he recommend some less severe form of punishment.
MR. BRODRICK: Some men convicted of military offences in South Africa are in civil convict prisons, where they are classified as, and associated with, civil first offenders. I have no information to show the exact number of soldiers so placed, but thirty-one men found guilty of sleeping on their posts are confined in convict prisons. The question of segregating military prisoners is at present under consideration. Sleeping on duty on active service is an offence of great gravity, as it endangers many lives, and has in the present campaign been the cause of surprise and loss of several posts. It therefore, by military law, subjects the offender to the penalty of death. Two men in South Africa have been sentenced to death, but the death penalty has been commuted by Lord Kitchener to penal servitude. In other cases sentences of penal servitude or imprisonment have been given. The Commander-in-Chief is at present considering these cases individually, and the hon. Member may rest assured that wherever leniency can be properly shown a mitigation of punishment will
be ordered. I am not aware how many of such offenders are confined in Dartmoor Prison, as the distribution is arranged by the Home Office, but the question of the segregation of prisoners convicted of military offences from others is being considered.
WAR EXPENDITURE;SOUTH AFRICAN CONTRACTORS.
MR. LABOUCHERE (Northampton): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he can state the amount of money paid or payable to contractors in South Africa in regard to war expenditure, together with the names of the principal contractors.
MR. BRODRICK: This information could only be obtained in detail by a very laborious process. I cannot, therefore, consent to throw this heavy work on the departments concerned.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS: Will the right hon. Gentleman give us the total amount paid or payable to the contractors up to a given date?
MR. BRODRICK: I think I could procure that.
CASUALTY LISTS.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN (Kilkenny): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he can explain why the War Office, when publishing the lists of recent casualties in South Africa, withheld particulars of the battles and dates, and whether he will see that in future particulars of dates, places, and causes of casualties are given.
MR. BRODRICK: All information forwarded in connection with these and other casualties has been and is always published, nothing whatever has been withheld. Dates and other information will be given as far as possible.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: I wish to know, then, whether it is Lord Kitchener who has withheld the information.
*MR. SPEAKER: Order, order&#x0021; That is not the question on the Paper.
LORD KITCHENER AND THE COLONIAL OFFICE.
MR. LABOUCHERE: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether
Lord Kitchener corresponds only with the War Office, or whether, since he has become Acting Lord High Commissioner as well as Commander-in-Chief of His Majesty's Forces in South Africa, he also corresponds with the Colonial Office.
MR. BRODRICK: Lord Kitchener corresponds with the War Office on all military affairs, and with the Colonial Office on all business connected with the office of High Commissioner.
PEACE NEGOTIATIONS WITH GENERAL BOTHA.
MR. LABOUCHERE: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether Lord Kitchener has a free hand to enter into negotiations with General Botha in regard to the conditions on which the Transvaalers and the Orange Staters might be prepared to agree to these States entering the area of the British Empire, or whether the sole terms on which we are ready to cease hostilities is the unconditional surrender of the Boer forces in the field and their deprivation of independence.
MR. BRODRICK: No instructions have been given which would prevent Lord Kitchener from receiving proposals which he would transmit at once for the instructions of His Majesty's Government, but in no case would either Lord Kitchener or His Majesty's Government consent to discuss the question of independence.
MR. LABOUCHERE: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether any despatches have been received from Lord Kitchener explaining more fully than in his telegrams his negotiations with General Botha; and, if so, whether he will lay them upon the Table of the House.
MR. BRODRICK: No despatches have been received from Lord Kitchener except that which has been laid on the Table of the House. I understand a further despatch is on the way.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Colonies whether the meeting of General Botha and Lord Kitchener on 28th February took place at the request of Lord Kitchener.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES (Mr. J. CHAMBERLAIN, Birmingham, W.): I have to refer the hon. Member to the statement of Lord Kitchener on page 1 of Cd. 528, to the effect that Mrs. Botha carried a verbal message that if Commandant Botha desired it Lord Kitchener would meet him as to means of ending the war on the express understanding that he would not do so if the question of independence were to be discussed in any way.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that, in answer to a similar question put before, he told me;
*MR. SPEAKER: Order, order&#x0021; It is not in order to discuss an answer to a previous question.
MR. FLAVIN (Kerry, N.): Did Lord Kitchener ask Mrs. Botha to arrange this interview?
MR. J. CHAMBERLAIN: No.
MR. LABOUCHERE: Are not the Government prepared to discuss the granting to the Orange State and the Transvaal even such independence as is possessed by Canada and Australia?
MR. J. CHAMBERLAIN: Certainly not at the present time.
SOUTH AFRICAN COMMISSIONS; REPORTS.
MR. ARTHUR ELLIOT (Durham): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Colonies whether he can say when the Report of the Transvaal Concession Commission will be in the hands of Members.
MR. J. CHAMBERLAIN: I have laid to-day the Reports by this Commission and by the Land Settlement Commission and the financial Report by Sir David Barbour. They have been submitted to Lord Milner, and will soon be in the hands of Members.
DEMURRAGE ON HIRED TRANSPORTS.
MR. HERBERT LEWIS (Flint Boroughs): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he can state how much has been paid for demurrage
to the owners of hired transports since September, 1899.
MR. BRODRICK: I am afraid the hon. Member is under some misapprehension. There is no demurrage on hired transports, which are paid for at so much per ton per month. If the hon. Member refers to cargo ships, I will try to obtain the information.
MR. D. A. THOMAS (Merthyr Tydvil): Will the right hon. Gentleman also say what despatch money has been received as a set-off against demurrage?
MR. BRODRICK: I am afraid I cannot answer that.
VLAKFONTEIN ENGAGEMENT;FALSE STATEMENTS FROM THE FRONT.
MR. ARTHUR LEE (Hampshire, Fareham): I beg to ask the Secretary for War a question, of which I have given him private notice;namely, whether he has any official information with reference to the report published by Renter's Agency to the effect that a Royal Artillery officer and a non-commissioned officer were shot in cold blood by the Boers for refusing to show the working of two-guns temporarily captured from our troops.
MR. BRODRICK: I have received a telegram from Lord Kitchener, and I am glad to say the report is unfounded. The telegram says: "In reference to the alleged murder of Lieutenant MacDougall and a sergeant-major of the 28th Battery, when I heard of the case I caused inquiries to be made among all wounded. Report unfounded. Will ask correspondents for their authority for statement."
MR. EDMUND ROBERTSON (Dundee): Did this report pass the censor?
MR. BRODRICK: I presume it went through the ordinary channels.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS: Will the right hon. Gentleman say whether, in view of the grave evils that result from untrue reports of this kind, incensing the public opinion of both countries, the Government will take steps to prosecute persons who send false information?
MR. BRODRICK: I think it is extremely desirable that reports which are false should not be published on either side, but I would point out that reports of a very damaging character, without the smallest foundation, have been published and largely circulated on the other side.
MR. DILLON (Mayo, E.): Will this correspondent be allowed to continue at the front?
MR. BRODRICK: I really cannot say anything about the question until I know exactly what occurred.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS: Will this correspondent's permit be withdrawn, like that of the representative of the South African News?
MR. LABOUCHERE: Will the right hon. Gentleman say what he means by "the other side"?
MR. BRODRICK: The Boers.
MILITARY DISTURBANCE AT SHORNCLIFFE.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he can explain the mutiny at Shorncliffe and the causes which led to it.
MR. BRODRICK: There was no mutiny, only a quarrel between two detachments. The men obeyed their officers at once;the disturbance was speedily quelled. An inquiry has been held, but no report has yet reached the War Office.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: Were not shots fired and bayonets fixed?
MR. BRODRICK: I believe a few shots were fired, but the report has not reached us.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: I suppose a few friendly shots were exchanged&#x0021;
PURCHASE OF FIELD GUNS IN GERMANY.
MR. E J. C. MORTON (Devonport): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he can state what were the
Votes in Supply the savings from which were by leave of the Treasury used to purchase for the Government the field guns purchased in Germany.
MR. BRODRICK: These guns were charged to Vote 9, Sub-head B, Field Artillery, 1900&#x2013;1, and at the time they were ordered there was no reason to anticipate any excess on that Vote as a whole.
INDIAN STATE FORESTS REVENUE.
MR. HERBERT LEWIS: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for India whether he can state what was the average annual net revenue of the State Forests in India for the years 1864&#x2013;7, 1872&#x2013;7, 1882&#x2013;7, and 1892&#x2013;7 respectively; and what was the net revenue for the last financial year.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA (Lord G. HAMILTON, Middlesex, Ealing): The average annual net revenue of the Forest Department in India has been as follows, for the periods mentioned, in pounds sterling, the rupees being converted at 1s. 4d. each:;1864&#x2013;67, £;93,672; 1872&#x2013;77, £;135,161; 1882&#x2013;87, £;249,253; 1892&#x2013;97, £;500,010; 1900&#x2013;1 (revised estimate), £;536,530.
ASIATIC LABOUR IN QUEENSLAND.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Colonies whether he can state why the Royal sanction has been refused to an Act passed by the Queensland Legislature prohibiting the employment of Asiatic and other coloured labourers in sugar mills receiving direct help from the Government.
MR. J. CHAMBERLAIN: His Majesty's Government have represented to the Queensland Government that the Bill in question is open to objection on grounds both of principle and policy;first, because it embodies a disqualification based solely on place of origin, and would therefore exclude British subjects in India and elsewhere, not on account of any moral, educational, or physical deficiency, but solely on difference of race and colour; secondly, that it is offensive to Japan, a friendly Power
inasmuch as it not only excludes natives of that country from employment, but also places them in the same category as Asiatics generally, without any consideration being paid to their state of civilisation.
INSTRUCTIONS TO SCHOOL INSPECTORS.
MR. YOXALL (Nottingham, W.): I beg to ask the Vice-President of the Committee of Council on Education if he can state the date at which copies of the Instructions to Inspectors will be issued to Members.
THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE OF COUNCIL ON EDUCATION (Sir J. GORST, Cambridge University): The document referred to in the Question is now in the hands of the printers, and, it is believed, will be ready shortly.
POTTERIES ARBITRATION.
*SIR CHARLES DILKE (Gloucestershire, Forest of Dean): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether the Potteries Arbitration has now passed legally beyond his control, or whether it would be possible to substitute for it, on the passing of the Government Factory and Workshop Bill, the procedure under the early clauses of that measure.
*THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT (Mr. RITCHIE, Croydon): The answer to the first paragraph of the question is in the affirmative; the point raised in the second paragraph does not therefore, I think, arise.
WORKING HOURS OF LONDON WAITERS.
MR. KEIR HARDIE (Merthyr Tydvil): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether he is aware that waiters in many of the principal hotels and restaurants of London are worked over seventy hours per week; and whether he proposes to introduce a clause into the new Factory and Workshop Act to regulate the hours of labour for waiters and waitresses.
*MR. RITCHIE: Representations in the sense of the first paragraph of the
question have been made to me, but I have no jurisdiction in the matter. As regards the second paragraph, the clause suggested would be outside the scope of the Factory Bill.
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION ACT.
MR. SCHWANN (Manchester, N.): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether his attention has been drawn to the inconvenience and delays which are being caused in the administration of the Workmen's Compensation Act by the uncertainty which exists as to the exact meaning of a week when the average weekly wage of a claimant has to be assessed under the Act; and, seeing that the Court of Appeal has decided not to deal with these cases until the House of Lords decides what is to be understood as the basis of calculation, whether he can take any steps, by legislation or otherwise, to obtain a prompt definition of the term.
*MR. RITCHIE: I am aware that there is in dispute a point of the nature indicated by the hon. Member; but I have no power to accelerate any decision of the courts of justice, and I am unable to contemplate the introduction this session of any measure for the amendment of the Workmen's Compensation Act.
MR. SCHWANN: May I ask whether it is in another place that the obstacle has practically arisen?
*MR. RITCHIE: I believe the question is rather mixed. I am not able to say at the moment quite where the difficulty lies.
WELSH-SPEAKING WITNESSES IN WELSH COUNTY COURTS.
MR. PHILIPPS (Pembroke): I beg to ask Mr. Attorney General whether his attention has been called to the fact that at the last county court at Haverfordwest Judge Bishop tried to stop a witness giving evidence in Welsh, saying that Welsh-speaking witnesses ought to be drowned, and whether he will bring this matter under the notice of the Lord Chancellor.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Sir ROBERT FINLAY, Inverness Burghs): I
have made inquiries with regard to this matter. I am informed that the learned judge did not try to stop a witness giving evidence in Welsh, but expressed some surprise at having a Welsh-speaking witness at Haverfordwest, where English is generally spoken. Any other observations which the learned judge made were of a jocular nature, and were so received by those who heard him.
MR. BRYN ROBERTS: Was not this judge appointed because, according to his own showing, he knew Welsh?
*MR. SPEAKER: That does not arise out of the question.
ORDNANCE SURVEY ASSISTANTS AT SOUTHAMPTON.
SIR BARRINGTON SIMEON (Southampton): I beg to ask the President of the Board of Agriculture whether any scheme is in contemplation for reducing the number of temporary civil assistants in the Ordnance Survey at Southampton; and, if so, whether he will explain what that scheme is, and whether such reduction means a reduction in the number originally proposed; and whether, in the case of temporary civil assistants being moved from Southampton, some allowance may be made to them for the expense of moving their household goods, and some extra consideration shown for married men with families.
*THE PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF AGRICULTURE (Mr. HANBURY, Preston): The strength at Southampton has of late been abnormally large in order to enable the large arrears, which had accumulated through the sudden increase of publication required for the revised maps and through want of accommodation, to be worked off. These arrears have now been reduced, and some small branches of the work having been practically completed, it has been necessary to reduce the staff. This has been done partly by absorbing all vacancies, partly by transferring employees elsewhere, principally to Ireland. With regard to the second paragraph of the question, the existing practice is that the railway and steamboat fares of the wives and children of all married assistants of twelve years service are paid from
public funds when such assistants are transferred from one division of the Survey to another, or when they have to move such distances as render necessary a journey by rail or by boat; and those fares are also paid in the case of families of employees on the Survey of not less than five years' service when moved on duty between England and Scotland, or between those countries and Ireland.
SIR BARRINGTON SIMEON: May I ask whether new buildings have not lately been erected?
*MR. HANBURY: I do not think that arises out of the question on the Paper. New buildings have been put up, but they have nothing to do with the increase in the staff.
MILK AND BUTTER STANDARDS.
MR. STRACHEY (Somersetshire, S.): I beg to ask the President of the Board of Agriculture whether he intends to adopt the standard for milk recommended by the Departmental Committee (Majority Report); and, if so, when such standard will come into force, and when he intends to appoint the promised Departmental Committee to inquire into a standard for butter.
*MR. HANBURY: I hope to be able to state what the standard will be in the course of next week;and it should come into force after a reasonable period of notice, from a month to six weeks. We have already collected a considerable body of evidence to submit to the proposed Committee on a butter standard, and I hope to nominate it during the present month.
CHEQUE BANK LIQUIDATION.
MR. COHEN (Islington, E.): On behalf of my hon. friend the Member for North Islington, I beg to ask the President of the Board of Trade whether he is aware that, owing to the delay in settling the Cheque Bank claims, small holders are being induced to part with their claims at a loss, and whether any steps are possible on the part of the Board of Trade to prevent this.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF TRADE (Mr. GERALD BALFOUR, Leeds, Central): I am afraid I can add
nothing to the reply which I gave the hon. Member for North Islington in answer to his question on the 10th of May.&#x2020; As no compulsory order has been made the Board of Trade have no control over the liquidators, and I am therefore unable to take any steps to expedite the distribution of the funds.
THE METRIC SYSTEM.
MR. LABOUCHERE: I beg to ask the President of the Board of Trade whether he has observed in the reports of our consular agents abroad frequent mention of the impediment to our commerce abroad that our existing system of weights and measures is found to be; and whether he contemplates legislation to replace it by a metric system.
MR. GERALD BALFOUR: Reports from His Majesty's representatives abroad frequently allude to the impediment caused to British trade by the adherence of many of our traders to the usual British system of weights and measures in their transactions with countries in which metric standards are in use. I may, however, point out that the Act of 1897 removed any legal impediment to the adoption of metric standards. The Government are not prepared to bring in a measure making the use of the system compulsory.
LAND FOR HIGHLAND COTTARS.
MR. WEIR (Ross and Cromarty): I beg to ask the Lord Advocate if he will state whether any action has been taken either by the Secretary for Scotland or the Congested Districts Board during the recess with a view to provide the landless cottars and fishermen of Bernera Island, of Lewis, and various districts in North Uist, with land at fair rentals, and, if not, will steps be taken at an early date to ascertain what land is available in the districts for the settlement of the people; and is he aware that the people of Bernera have been applying to the Congested Districts Board for land for several years.
*THE LORD ADVOCATE (Mr. A. GRAHAM MURRAY, Buteshire): The answer to the first portion of the hon. Member's
&#x2020; See preceding volume, page 1314.
question is in the negative. The Secretary for Scotland and the Congested Districts Board are anxious to give every consideration to any applications made by cottars which are put forward in a legitimate manner. They are aware that the Bernera cottars have wanted land for some time past, and they are in consultation in regard both to their case and to that of the North Uist cottars. The latest report from Bernera, however, is to the effect that the cottars have been illegally cutting peat on a farm which they threaten to occupy by force, in anticipation of such occupation. The North Uist cottars have also passed resolutions proposing action in defiance of the law. If they wish to prevent their case from receiving favourable consideration, they cannot more effectively secure that end than by such misguided action.
STORNOWAY MAIL.
MR. WEIR: I beg to ask the Secretary to the Treasury, as representing the Postmaster General, whether, in view of the fact that the Stornoway mail has been conveyed via Mallaig since April 1st, the official reports show that the experiment has now been in force a sufficient time to warrant the Postmaster General in inviting tenders for this service, and, if not, will he state when he will be able to arrive at a decision on the subject, and will care be taken that a modern and swifter steamer is secured for this service in place of the present boat, which is forty years old.
THE FINANCIAL SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY (Mr. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN, Worcestershire, E.): The service vi&#x00E2; Mallaig is not yet sufficiently established, especially in view of a projected acceleration on the Highland Railway, to enable the Postmaster General to form an opinion as to the permanent advantages of the Mallaig route to Stornoway. In any case, having regard to the loss on the Stornoway mail service, the Postmaster General does not consider that he would be justified in recommending that additional expense should be incurred for the purpose of providing swifter steamers for the conveyance of the mails.
MR. WEIR: Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that the steamer is forty
years old, and can only go ten knots an hour?
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: It is not the duty of the Postmaster General to provide steamers for passenger accommodation;only to see that they are suitable for the conveyance of the mails.
KERRY MOVING BOG.
MR. MURPHY (Kerry, E.): I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether he can say when he proposes to give information to the House in reference to the congested district in Kerry in which the moving bog is situated; and whether, having regard to the number of congested districts in Kerry, he will make arrangements to allow the county council to nominate a representative of the county on the Congested Districts Board.
THE CHIEF SECRETARY FOR IRELAND (Mr. WYNDHAM, Dover): Various opinions, all purely conjectural, have been assigned for the bog-slide in the district mentioned, which took place over four years ago. An interesting account of the occurrence will be found in the Sixth Annual Report of the Congested Districts Board. The reply to the second paragraph is in the negative.
MR. MURPHY: May I ask what the right hon. Gentleman proposes to do to prevent a recurrence of the bog-slide which did so much injury on the former occasion?
MR. WYNDHAM: The Government cannot undertake to legislate against physical disasters. A remedy might be found if a drainage board were established under the Drainage of Act 1863. In that event the initiative would have to be taken by the locality, and if such initiative were taken the Congested Districts Board would then consider whether it could afford assistance by means of a contribution,
MR. FLAVIN: Could not the matter be in some degree remedied by giving Kerry a representative on the Congested Districts Board?
[No answer was returned.]
CONGESTED DISTRICTS;CONNAUGHT.
DR. AMBROSE (Mayo, W.): I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether, as President of the Congested Districts Board, he is aware that several electoral divisions in the Province of Connaught are deprived of the benefits of the Congested Districts Act owing to the fact that there may be one large holding which is highly rated in the non-scheduled district, or that such district may be situated in the neighbourhood of a town the rateable value of which is higher than that which would entitle it to be scheduled as a congested district, thus depriving its inhabitants of the benefits of the Act, he will remedy this state of things by introducing this session a Bill making the whole of Connaught a congested district. I wish, however, to draw attention to the way in which the question I handed in appears on the Paper, which makes me ask if the right hon. Gentleman will make a town a congested district.
*MR. SPEAKER: If the hon. Member finds fault with the way in which a question appears he should refer to me.
DR. AMBROSE: I protest against the fact of a town being situated near a non-scheduled district being made to read as if I asked that it should be made a congested district.
*MR. SPEAKER: The hon. Member may be clear as to his grievance, but he has not made it clear to me. He may either put the question as it stands, or put it in a different form another day.
DR. AMBROSE: I will put it as it is. The right hon. Gentleman will understand.
MR. WYNDHAM: I cannot give an undertaking to introduce legislation in the direction suggested during the present session.
POSTAL FACILITIES AT FIRIES.
MR. MURPHY: I beg to ask the Secretary to the Treasury, as representing the Postmaster General, what reply he has to give to the inquiry made as to postal deliveries in Firies, county Kerry, in a letter which was forwarded to him some time ago.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: There is already a Sunday post to Firies, county Kerry. The question of extending the Sunday delivery to Molahiffe and Ballyfinnane, as requested in the letter of the hon. Member, has been considered, but in view of the high cost of maintaining the existing service the Postmaster General regrets that he would not be justified in complying with the request.
IRISH UNIVERSITY EDUCATION.
MR. PATRICK O'BRIEN: I beg to ask the First Lord of the Treasury whether he is yet in a position to name the Royal Commission on University Education in Ireland.
THE FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY (Mr. A. J. BALFOUR, Manchester, E.): I am sorry to say I am not in a position to do this.
WAR OFFICE ORGANISATION;COMMITTEE'S REPORT.
MR. ARTHUR LEE: I beg to ask the First Lord of the Treasury whether any opportunity will be given this session for discussing the Report of the Committee on War Office Organisation.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: It is not for me to pronounce on the subject, but it is possible the question may be raised on the Vote for the Salary of the Secretary for War. I do not think it would be expedient to give a special day.
ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS-PLACING IN THE LIBRARY;EXPEDITING HANSARD REPORT.
MR. HERBERT LEWIS: I beg to ask the First Lord of the Treasury whether, in view of the difficulty of hearing the replies to questions, and having regard to the delay in receiving proofs of questions and answers, and the repetition, partly arising from such delay, of questions which have already been asked, and for the general convenience of Members, arrangements will be made to file in the Library copies of questions which appear on the Notice Paper, and the replies to such questions, until the Hansard Reports containing such questions and answers have been placed in the hands of Members. In asking this
question perhaps I may say, in regard to the official reports, that I make no imputation or suggestion whatever against the contractors, who are fulfilling the terms of their contract.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: The last statement of the hon. Gentleman is perfectly true;that the contract time for publication is always kept. As to the suggestion contained in the hon. Member's question, there would be, I believe, great difficulty, if not almost impossibility, in carrying it into effect. Some of the most important questions are about matters of which no notice is given, and in such cases I do not think it would be practicable to adopt the plan the hon. Gentleman recommends. The only method of meeting his views would, I think, be to devise some system by which the publication of The Parliamentary Debates would be expedited; otherwise, I think the hon. Member must depend on the reports which appear in the newspapers. Let me, however, say that all my colleagues, without exception, will only be too glad to give any Member who has asked them a question and has not caught the answer, a full statement in writing of what they have said in the House. I do not think I can add anything to that.
MR. HERBERT LEWIS: I am very much obliged to the right hon. Gentleman for the reply he has given, but, arising out of it, may I ask whether it has been brought to his notice that in the Canadian Parliament reports of each sitting are furnished to Members on the following morning, although the House frequently sits till two or three or four o'clock?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I was not aware of the fact till the hon. Gentleman courteously informed me, and no such rapidity of production has ever been attempted in the House of Commons. Whether it would be practicable here I am not able to say.
MR. SCHWANN: Would it not be possible for two sets of replies to be sent down, so that one set might be filed in the Library?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I am not sure that that could be done. The House
must remember that the habit of asking supplementary questions;which may be a good practice or not;makes it impossible to reproduce all that occurs here by means of the printed answers given. If the House would be contented with the questions on the Paper something might be done.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT (Warwickshire, Rugby): Would it not be possible, when a Member puts a question privately to the head of a Department, for him to get a reply in a shorter time than is now taken? I put a question or two last week to the Postmaster-General and the head of another Department, and received an acknowledgment and an intimation that the questions should have attention, but I have had no further reply.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I do not know the questions put by the hon. Member, but I am sure that every Department will do its best to give an expeditious reply to any question put by a member of the House.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT: Will the right hon. Gentleman consult the contractors for Hansard as to whether it would be possible to have by the following day a verbatim report of the answers to questions simply? An attempt to do something of this kind was made some years ago, and, though it broke down, it was not from any reason such as the right hon. Gentleman has suggested, but from the failure of the machinery.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I doubt whether such a proposal could be carried out;at least, to the extent the hon. Gentleman supposes.
GIBRALTAR WORKS COMMITTEE.
MR. M'KENNA (Monmouthshire, N.): I beg to ask the First Lord of the Treasury whether any Member of the Gibraltar Commission has resigned his position; if so, whether he has given any explanation of his reasons for taking this course; and if such explanation is in writing, whether he will lay it upon the Table.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: As the hon. Member is aware, the investigation into
the subject of Gibraltar was made by a Committee of a very informal character. It is true that on this informal Committee was one Member, my hon. friend the Member for King's Lynn, who did not continue his labours until the end of its work. I know he stated his reasons to the First Lord of the Admiralty, but I do not propose to lay the correspondence on the Table of the House.
MR. JOHN REDMOND (Waterford): Does the right hon. Gentleman propose to give the House any opportunity of considering or discussing this matter?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: No, Sir, there is no Vote for the salary of my hon. friend the Member for King's Lynn.
MR. GIBSON BOWLES (Lynn Regis): May I ask my right hon. friend whether, although there is no Vote or likelihood of a Vote for any salary for me, there is not a motion on the Paper for next Tuesday which will enable the whole matter to be discussed?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I was not aware of it. Next Tuesday is allocated to other business; the first Order will be the motion to take further facilities for Government business, and the second Order will be the Factories Bill.
MR. GIBSON BOWLES: Will the right hon. Gentleman be surprised if, in the circumstances, I oppose that motion?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I should not be greatly surprised at my hon. friend opposing anything.
BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE.
SIR H. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN (Stirling Burghs): Since the right hon. Gentleman has told us what business will be done on Tuesday, may I ask what will be taken on Monday?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: On Monday I propose to take first the Civil List, and then will follow, though I do not pledge, myself as to the order, the Hospitals Bill, the Loan Bill, the Land Purchase Bill, and the Larceny Bill.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
To Mr. Bignold, for a fortnight, on account of domestic affliction.;(Sir William Walrond.)
SUPPLY.
[9TH ALLOTTED DAY.]
Considered in Committee.
(In the Committee.)
[Mr. J. W. LOWTHER (Cumberland, Penrith) in the Chair.]
REVENUE DEPARTMENTS ESTIMATES, 1901&#x2013;2.
1. Motion made, and Question proposed, "That a sum, not exceeding £;1,221,713, be granted to His Majesty to complete the sum necessary to defray the Charge which will come in course of payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902, for the Salaries and Expenses of the Inland Revenue Department."
MR. HERBERT LEWIS (Flint Boroughs) moved a reduction of the Vote by £;100 in respect to Item A. He said that his object was to draw the attention of the Government to the very large number of claims for rebatement of income tax. This question was much more important now because the income tax had increased to a very large extent. Naturally, in the past, there were a very large number of people who never troubled to make claims for rebatements. He did not wish to make the slightest imputation against the officials concerned, but he would say that a large number of people with small incomes found great difficulty in obtaining the rebates of income tax to which they were entitled. Many of these people were not accustomed to business, and they required to be treated with a great deal of attention and courtesy. The surveyors of taxes had undoubtedly in the past been overdriven, and he did not know of any body of civil servants who had had such a hard time of it within the last few years as the surveyors of taxes. What he wished the hon. Gentleman to do was to give specific instruction to all the officers concerned that they should afford all the aid they
possibly could to persons of small incomes. After all, those people were entitled to the money. All he wanted was that the officials should help these people as far as possible to obtain the rebatements to which they were entitled, and to help them to get such rebatements with as little trouble as possible. His second point was in reference to the Special Commissioners of Income Tax. He wished to know why a man who had to appear before the Special Commissioners of Income Tax was not allowed to have legal assistance, or anyone else to speak on his behalf. There were a number of persons who appealed to the Special Commissioners who had not had the necessary training to put their cases properly before these Special Commissioners, and he wished to know why that legal assistance was not allowed them. He noticed under this heading a number of references to the Land Tax Commissioners. Thousands of Commissioners of Land Tax had been appointed who had never heard of a single meeting for the election of the Commissioners of Income Tax, and they had not the least idea where the meetings would be held. If they wished to know they would have to subscribe regularly to the official Gazette. Ordinary people had not the time to read the official Gazette, and it seemed to him to be a most extraordinary thing that the Commissioners of Land Tax did not receive proper notice as to when and where such meetings would be held. He felt so strongly upon this last point that he begged leave to move the reduction of Item A by £;100, and he did so in the hope that the hon. Gentleman would give him such an assurance on the point as would justify him in withdrawing his motion.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Item A (Salaries) be reduced by £;100.";(Mr. Herbert Lewis.)
*MR. CORRIE GRANT (Warwickshire, Rugby) said he wished to call attention to the position of surveyors of taxes and to the necessity for the creation of more new districts in the great centres of industry and commerce. In the year 1900 the hon. Member for the Horsham Division of Sussex called the attention of the present President of the Board of
Agriculture to this matter, and the right hon. Gentleman admitted that the surveyors of taxes were overworked and that new districts were required. Some attempt had been made to deal with the matter since. There had been a recasting of the divisions and a new class had been created. He believed that under the new pressure with regard to the income tax it would be desirable in the great cities that the work in connection with Schedule D should be allotted to surveyors of long experience and training. He put forward the suggestion not alone on the ground that the present surveyors were overworked, but with a view of realising income out of the increase in the number of surveyors. A considerable amount of income tax was recovered by the efforts of those gentlemen, and an increase in the number would be a paying concern, because it would bring in a far greater return than the amount expended on the salaries of new surveyors. With regard to assistant surveyors, he wished to know whether there was a sufficient number of juniors in existence at present to provide for all the necessities of the service.
CAPTAIN NORTON (Newington, W.) pointed out that owing to the starvation, so to speak, of the staff of surveyors the country was suffering a considerable loss. It was admitted that the amount of labour imposed upon the surveyors had very largely increased. This operated very harshly against those in receipt of small incomes who required to take steps in order to get the rebate to which they were entitled. He knew that from his own experience of one particular class;namely, Government officials, Army and Navy officers, and others. Many of that class, owing to their want of knowledge in connection with this question, failed to receive back that to which they were entitled. If a proper staff of duly qualified assessors, not overworked, were appointed, cases of hardship like that would be dealt with, and the injustice now done to this class might be obviated. He did not wish to say anything derogatory of the great class of people who were engaged in commercial and mercantile pursuits, but it was well known that they did not pay
as closely and accurately upon their incomes as those who were in receipt of small fixed incomes, and, therefore, owing to this fact, naturally a larger proportion of the tax fell upon those who received small fixed incomes, inasmuch as a greater increase in the tax was required because a certain amount which ought to be obtained was not realised. He hoped the hon. Gentleman would see to the increasing of the staff in order that, in justice to those who were drawing the smaller incomes and the ratepayers generally, the full amount that ought to be realised was obtained.
MR. SPEAR (Devonshire, Tavistock) hoped the Government would not yield to the advice of the hon. Member for West Newington to increase the staff of surveyors. He had been an Income Tax Commissioner for years, and he was bound to say that he thought the staff in the part from which he came was abundant. The hon. Member for West Newington thought a considerable amount might be derived from the income tax if there was a larger number of surveyors. His own experience was that a good many men paid income tax who really ought not to do so. The surveyors at present were in the habit;he did not wish to speak in a derogatory way of them;of guessing men's incomes and causing them the inconvenience of appearing before the Commissioners, a process which was extremely unpleasant in many instances.
MR. POWER (Waterford, E.) said that the complaint made in England with regard to the repayments to which people were entitled in connection with the income tax applied with particular force in Ireland. He knew many cases in which people of limited means preferred to pay the demand made upon them rather than go to the worry of filling up the form which had to be sent to the surveyor of taxes. He complained that the clerks of the income tax department had no status whatever, and he thought that, in the interest of the payers of the tax and in the interest of the community at large, some sort of status should be given to them on account of the most delicate work they had to carry on. Fifteen years ago he asked a question
on this subject and got a soft answer, but nothing had been done. He asked whether nothing could be done to simplify the forms in the first instance, and also the procedure which had to be gone through in asking for a rebate.
MR. LOUGH (Islington, W.) said a Return was issued lately showing the dates at which the people of the three kingdoms paid their income tax, and it had puzzled him very much. The Return gave the figures for three years, but as they were almost the same in each he would only mention the last of the three. In England 32 per cent. was paid by the end of January, and 53 per cent. by the end of February. The figures were about the same for Ireland. About one half came in during March. In Scotland by 31st January 77 per cent. was paid, and by 28th February no less than 93 per cent. was paid. He asked if the Secretary to the Treasury could give any explanation of the fact that Scotland paid a so much larger proportion of the income tax in advance than either England or Ireland, and whether there was any legal right to collect the tax before 31st March. He would also like, if the hon. Gentleman could give it, information as to the number of joint-stock companies registered during the present year, and as to the seizures for illicit distillation. There were twelve such seizures in England, five in Scotland, and no fewer than 1,828 in Ireland. The Treasury ought to be able to throw some light on the extraordinary figures for Ireland. Was the large number of seizures due to the employment of the constabulary in this extra police duty, and were the constabulary paid a special fee for each seizure?
MR. LLOYD-GEORGE (Carnarvon Boroughs) called attention to the mode of appointing Income Tax Commissioners. Once in each Parliament an Act was passed prescribing the method by which the Commissioners were to be appointed. The appointment was in the hands of the Land Tax Commissioners. The clerks were supposed to summon the Commissioners for the purpose of appointing Income Tax Commissioners, but, as a matter of fact, they never did so. He asked who it was that took upon them-
selves to override the Act of Parliament which directed that the Commissioners should be summoned. Was it the clerks, acting upon their own initiative, because they did not like the Act, or was it done under the authority of a Treasury Minute? In either case, the Act was set at defiance, and the Committee were entitled to some explanation of the matter.
THF FINANCIAL SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY (Mr. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN, Worcestershire, E.) said, with regard to the question raised by the hon. Member for Flint, he thought the difficulties which poor people experienced in securing the repayments of income tax to which they were entitled arose in the majority of cases from the fact that they were people unaccustomed to business, and to whom the simplest form;and from the nature of the case these forms could not always be simple;would present some difficulties. The officers of the Inland Revenue who had to examine these claims had thrown upon them an enormous amount of detailed trouble owing to the imperfect form in which the claims were made; but the claims were examined with all possible despatch, and he hoped and believed that they were dealt with with perfect courtesy and the desire that every citizen should come by what was his due. He had had a little experience of making up returns for other people, and he would bring the suggestion of the hon. Member to the notice of the Chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue. If there was any reason to suppose that any officers were dealing with the claimants uncivilly, or throwing unnecessary difficulties in their way, he was quite certain that the Board of Inland Revenue would be the first people to desire to put a stop to it. He did not think it was possible to simplify the forms which had to be filled up; but if the hon. Member had any suggestion to make on that subject he would be glad to lay it before the Board of Inland Revenue. Such complications as existed were inherent to the subject itself rather than to the, particular form chosen. The hon. Member for Flint had asked why people who appeared before the Special Commissioners were not allowed legal assistance. The Special Commissioners
were not themselves legal gentlemen, and he was inclined to think that it would not be in the interest of those who appeared before the Special Commissioners that they should have legal assistance. It was not a formal court, and it was better for all concerned that the proceedings should be kept as informal as possible.
The hon. Gentleman had asked him what steps were taken to summon meetings of the Land Tax Commissioners, and had demanded that he should pledge himself that in every case individual notice should be sent to each Commissioner. All the obligations of the law were fulfilled by the publication in the Gazette of notices of the meetings, and it could hardly be expected that the Gazette notice would not be seen, and that individual notices should be sent out at the same time. Unless there was some real object to be gained by a change, he thought it was undesirable, because it would involve a great deal of trouble and labour. If the hon. Member would tell him what special difficulties there were in the present system he would be glad to meet him and discuss the matter with him.
The hon. and gallant Member for Newington had raised a question in regard to the staff. The hon. Member, as he understood him, maintained that the staff was over-worked, that the number of surveyors was too few, and that it ought to be increased. These questions were undoubtedly connected, but perhaps not in the way the hon. Member seemed to think. Something like twenty districts and new surveyors had been added, and in order to secure a sufficient number of experienced officers they had been obliged to suspend the superannuation rule. This was not done in the interest of the gentlemen on the staff, but in the interest of the Service and of the public; and he was hopeful that before the Vote was discussed again the rule would be once more enforced. He trusted, however, that the hon. Member would not press him to say at what particular date the rule would be enforced. It was the duty of the Board of Inland Revenue to consider what was necessary for carrying on their labours to the best advantage, and also not to create unnecessary posts, or to spend money which
might otherwise be saved. The hon. Gentleman had asked him about assistant surveyors. He did not think it was desirable to have a very large class of assistant surveyors, and he would be sorry to see that body increased to a large extent. That increase of the staff had been urged on the ground that it would lead to a closer collection of the income tax, but he thought the remedy for any attempt to avoid payment was to be found in other directions; and he hoped as time went on they would get a closer collection of what was due than now existed.
The hon. Member for West Islington had asked the question;of which he would have liked some notice, in order to fully deal with it;as to the closer collection of the income tax in Scotland than in other parts of the United Kingdom. The hon. Member for East Edinburgh had moved for a Return in regard to the collection of the income tax in different parts of the Kingdom. That would involve the Treasury in considerable expense, but he would endeavour to see whether the Return could be made. The closer collection of the income tax in Scotland was due, he believed, to the habits of the Scottish people, who had a desire to meet their obligations the moment they became due. That was most creditable to them, but he also thought it was not because the Scotch were more really anxious to pay their income tax than the people in England, or even Ireland, but because what was known as the official threatening letter was sent out more promptly in Scotland than in England or Ireland. As the tax was a heavy one this year, the circumstances of its collection should not be made more stringent than usual.
The hon. Member also asked some explanation in regard to the rewards paid for the seizure of illicit stills in the United Kingdom and in Ireland, and to whom these rewards were paid. There was not the same temptation to the illicit distillation of spirits in England and Scotland as in Ireland. The hon. Member did throw out the suggestion that the Returns were corrected. He did not profess that he had looked into this question very closely, but he would make inquiries into the matter. He, however, could not imagine that the
Returns were false intentionally. The rewards were payable in all the divisions of the United Kingdom mainly to the police or the revenue officers who had been instrumental in the detection of frauds on the revenue.
MR. LOUGH asked whether the police were entrusted with this duty in any part of the United Kingdom except in Ireland.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN said that the police were not employed in this matter so much in the United Kingdom as in Ireland. In England and in Scotland the duty fell more on the Inland Revenue officers than on the police, which in Ireland were in closer connection with the Government. The amount of the rewards paid depended on special circumstances. In the great majority of cases they were small rewards of 6s. or 10s., but in special circumstances the amount was as much as £;2 or £;3.
*SIR JOSEPH LEESE (Lancashire, Accrington) asked the Financial Secretary to the Treasury whether, when the conference with some honourable Members which he had promised took place, he would consider the manner in which the election of the Income Tax Commissioners was made when vacancies occurred after the first appointment. He was afraid that although a technical statutory obligation might be fulfilled when vacancies occurred, there had been, in recent years, a system of co-optation, which seemed to him to be a direct violation of the statute, and he hoped that the system by which these Commissioners elected themselves would not be allowed to go on. He had a case in his mind which when vacancies occurred persons only approved by the remaining members of the Commission had the slightest chance of election. Contrary to all enactment and practically subversive of Parliamentary intention, these bodies of Income Tax Commissioners were gradually becoming "close boroughs." He rejoiced to think that a conference with the Financial Secretary might restore the elective methods and destroy the present ones, which are practically co-optative.
MR. RENSHAW (Renfrew, W.) thought that the Scotch people would
consider the Income Tax Return a very useful Return. He was perfectly aware of the fact that one of the reasons why the income tax was paid so promptly in Scotland was because, when the Return was made, a notice was immediately sent out to say if payment was not made in fourteen days unpleasant proceedings would take place. That practice had not been observed in either England or Ireland, and the sooner the practice of the collection of the income tax in those countries was brought up to the level of the Scotch practice the better.
MR. THOMAS SHAW (Hawick Burghs) said he thought the Return would be a most useful document. The suggestion was that Scotland had displayed undue virtue in the payment of this tax, but after explanation it was discovered that this duty was actually due on the 1st of January. What Scotland wanted to know was not why she should be made to pay on the nail, but why England and Ireland should be placed upon a different plane. What did the Government propose to do when this Return brought home the fact, as he was informed, that there was an actual loss to the revenue of £;30,000 per annum, owing to the income tax not being promptly collected when it was due. He wished for some explanation as to what the Government's attitude was going to be in regard to this matter. Was the House to be content with the proposition that the income tax, which was due on 1st January, was to be paid in the month of March? Would it not be better for the Government to say that the practice in Scotland was a better practice, and to see that the example of Scotland was followed south of the Tweed and in Ireland?
MR. BRIGG (Yorkshire, W.R., Keighley) said he supported the hon. Member who moved the reduction on the grounds of economy. He also wished the Financial Secretary would inquire into the cost of collection of the excise and customs duties devoted to technical education. A very large amount might be saved in the collection of these duties if the different localities were allowed to collect their own amounts. Under the present system, these duties were collected and the money sent to London, and
thence was returned to the different localities. The reason he drew attention to this matter was that the cost of collection of taxes was one of the largest items of expenditure they had to deal with in the matter of Inland Revenue.
MR. GIBSON BOWLES (Lynn Regis) said he wished to call attention to some petty and irritating annoyances from which the public suffered in connection with the collection of establishment licences. He thought he would be able to show that the method of the collection of these taxes was an excessively disagreeable method, and he hoped that reconsideration would be given to the matter. What he objected to was that at the commencement of the year one was called upon to make a return of carriages and horses and men-servants, etc., in one's establishment, and then if a man removed for a short time he was called upon to make a separate return. That was not a right method. Once a return was made to the central office, that should be sufficient. Only a short time ago, having paid upon his servants and dogs in the early part of the year, he had received a sort of threatening letter from the Inland Revenue suggesting he had more menservants and more dogs than he paid for. As a matter of fact, he had paid licences for four men-servants and four dogs; but one of the dogs got lost and one of the men-servants, having had a difference with the under-footman over the housemaid, had left, and he had only three men-servants and three dogs, and not only could he get no return for the money which he had overpaid, but there was this suspicion on the part of the Inland Revenue that he kept more dogs and men-servants than he paid for. What he complained of was a want of proper inter-communication between the central office and the subservient officials.
MR. DILLON (Mayo, E.) said he desired to call attention to the extraordinary figures given in the Inland Revenue Returns regarding the seizures of illicit spirits in Ireland and Scotland. As an Irishman he should protest against the manner in which the figures were given, without a word of explanation.
According to the Returns referred to, there were only five cases of illicit distillation in Scotland, while in Ireland it was said there were 1,826. Anyone reading the Return as it was presented to the House would imagine, if he did not know the real circumstances, that the whole population of Ireland was engaged in illicit distillation of spirits. An explanation of these figures was absolutely necessary. Some information was also desirable regarding the proceeds from this enormous number of seizures in Ireland. If penalties were recovered and sales effected, a very considerable sum must have been realised. Where was the account of that money, and how were the rewards given, and, in cases where the action of the police was recognised by the Inland Revenue authorities, who fixed the amount of the rewards? On these points some detailed information ought to be given. From his experience in the west of Ireland, he had a strong suspicion that there was something very extraordinary about these Returns. He did not believe there had been 1,826 bona fide seizures, and he would like to know was there anything going on in the nature of bogus seizures?
MR. LOUGH said that the answer given by the Secretary to the Treasury with regard to the seizure of illicit stills in Ireland was not at all satisfactory, and a strong protest ought to be made. Some explanation certainly ought to be given of the figures which had been put before the House. For his part he thought that the fact of there being 1,826 seizures in Ireland showed the tremendous pressure of the whisky tax in Ireland.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN said he must admit that the figures appeared rather extraordinary, but it should be remembered that in Scotland the seizures used to be far greater than they are now, and that the illicit distillation trade was almost stopped owing to the great risks accompanying it. He would inquire as to the reason for the large number of seizures in Ireland, and as regards the rewards given to the police; the amount in all cases was fixed by the Inland Revenue authorities, according
to the circumstances of each case. The value of what was seized was in the great majority of cases very small.
MR. HERBERT LEWIS said the replies which he had received were of such a satisfactory character that he did not think he would be justified in dividing the House. He therefore begged leave to withdraw his Amendment.
Motion, by leave, withdrawn.
Original Question again proposed.
MR. WHITLEY (Halifax) said there were several matters connected with this Vote which merited attention. The first matter to which he wished to call attention would be found on reference to page 25 of the Votes. He alluded to the great increase in the cost of the Estate Duty Office staff, first in the appointment of a Government staff of assistant secretaries; then the appointment of a new examiner of wills, the appointment of an assistant examiner of wills, the appointment of four first class clerks, the appointment of nine new second division clerks, and the appointment of six new assistant clerks. He thought such a great increase as that in the staff of a particular department ought to have an explanation from the mover of the Vote before the Committee were asked to go to a division upon it. On the next page of the Votes;page 26;there was an effort which, if intended to secure economy, did not realise it. In the Accountant and Comptroller General's Office there was a decrease of six in the number of second division clerks. That would appear to show that the Department was overstaffed, but at the same time there was an increase of seven in the division clerks of higher grade, at a salary of £;100 more than that of the six clerks who had been dispensed with. He hoped the Financial Secretary, to the Treasury would give a proper explanation of that item before the Vote was passed. The third matter that he had to bring before the Committee was on page 29, and it was exactly similar to that to which he drew attention last night on the War Office Vote, when the noble Lord
in charge of the Vote (Lord Stanley) admitted an irregularity and promised that it should not occur again. He noticed that in the Stamping Department there were four newly-appointed clerks, whose salaries, as given in the maximum and minimum columns, amounted to £;94 more than they were entitled to receive on the face of the Vote. He took this opportunity to protest against that difference in the scale. He noticed that two senior messengers were described in the Vote as "redundant." When an officer was said to be redundant he supposed it meant that he was not wanted, or that there was no work for him to do in his department. The future strength of the messengers would' be three less than at present, the number being seven, so that three were redundant. This he regarded as a waste of money, and it showed that messengers and clerks had not got full work to do, and this always had a demoralising effect upon the working of any department. Persons in that position were only waiting for their pensions without having full employment. Then he noticed that there was a proposal to reduce the payments of the charwoman from 12s. to 10s. 6d. a week. He thought that the wages of the charwoman ought to have been left as they were, while the two messengers should have been removed, and their salaries of £;100 each saved by the Treasury. He would be satisfied if the Secretary of the Treasury gave a pledge that these matters would be inquired into, and that such anomalies would not recur in future.
MR. RENSHAW said the Circular dated December, 1900, in which new regulations were laid down in respect of the appointment of surveyors and land valuation assessors in Scotland, would alter the system which had hitherto obtained. He was of opinion that the system which had been adopted for years past by the Inland Revenue for the appointment of these officials should be continued. The effect of the new regulations would be to get a worse class of officials, whereas it was in the interest of the public that the best class of persons who could be obtained should be appointed to these duties. He thought the result
of the new regulations, if put into force, would be very undesirable. Arrangements should be made by which the Board of Inland Revenue might receive representations from the Scottish authorities in respect of this matter, and he hoped an assurance would be given that the effect of the new rules would not be to give Scotland an inferior class of official to discharge the responsible duties which had hitherto been so effectively discharged.
MR. CALDWELL (Lanarkshire, Mid) said the matter which had just been referred to had been under his observation, but he quite admitted it required to be gone into in greater detail than was possible under this Vote. With regard to the collection of the income tax, seeing that the financial year was from 31st March to 31st March, it seemed to him that the tax should be collected in the month of January, so that it would be paid well within the year. The income tax was an Imperial tax, and ought to be collected all over the kingdom alike. Scotland, through paying at an earlier period than England and Ireland, was practically paying £;30,000 a year more than her proper proportion as compared with the rest of the United Kingdom. That, obviously, was an injustice. He did not for a moment suggest that the payment in Scotland should be postponed, but if the tax was collected in England the same as in Scotland there would be a considerable saving to the Exchequer. Unless an assurance was given that the collection would be made in England in the month of January, as was done in Scotland, he should, as a protest, take the opinion of the Committee on the matter. He therefore moved to reduce the Vote by £;100.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Item A (Salaries) be reduced by £;100.";(Mr. Caldwell.)
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: The point raised by the hon. Member for West Renfrewshire is certainly one worthy of consideration, and if a proper representation of the case is made I have no doubt the Board of Inland Revenue will gladly listen to it and give it their careful consideration. The alterations
in the staff, referred to by the hon. Member for Halifax, are in pursuance of the recommendations of a Departmental Committee presided over by the hon. Member for Haddington. The work of the Estate Duty Office has very largely increased of recent years in consequence of the increase of the death duties. I suppose there are few Government departments which within the last ten years have not been the subject of very careful inquiry as to the numbers and the classes of the staffs, but no office has any power to increase its staff without Treasury sanction. Each case is carefully examined on its merits, and while we naturally feel that if an office is understaffed the work cannot be done properly, still we are anxious to prevent any unreasonable or unnecessary growth of staff. With regard to the clerks spoken of as "redundant," the same point was raised two or three weeks ago, and I hoped I had made the matter clear to the hon. Member. It simply means that in the course of reorganisation or inquiry it has been decided that for the permanent requirements of the office an official of a particular grade at present there is not required. If a second division clerk is to be substituted for a higher division clerk, the higher division clerk at present engaged would be indicated in the Estimates as "redundant," so that Members might have it before them that that is a post to be abolished on a vacancy occurring, or that it is to be filled by an officer of a lower grade. The officer is redundant not in the sense that there is no work for him to do, but only in the sense that an officer of his particular grade is not required for the work. If we did not have him we should have to have a clerk of a lower grade. It is not economical to retire the more expensive officer on a pension and at the same time engage a clerk of a lower grade to do the work. It is better that the higher grade man should work out his time, but, of course, if he could usefully be transferred to another office he would be so transferred.
MR. WHITLEY: Is that ever done?
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: Oh, yes; but, of course, it can only be done within limits. A man who has served in a particular office for a number of
years has probably acquired skill or knowledge which makes him more useful in that office than he would be in another. The hon. Member for Mid Lanark has again called attention to the collection of the income tax. I quite agree that it is desirable that all parts of the United Kingdom should be treated alike in this matter and the pressure applied equally on all. I think, however, that with the long practice which has grown up in this country, and with, as I believe, though I am unable to give the reference at the moment, something like a Parliamentary pledge on the subject, it would be very difficult to enforce immediate collection of the income tax. Moreover, I do not think the time when that tax has just been raised to 1s. 2d. is the best moment to choose to be more exacting in its collection or more harassing in regard to it than we have been hitherto. With regard to the four clerks, the last item on page 29, they appear for the first time under that heading, but they are not new appointments; they have been transferred from another branch, and that is why the amount in the first column does not agree with the total of their minimum salaries.
MR. THOMAS SHAW: I have every desire to take any pledge that is given from the opposite Bench with regard to the collection of revenue, but I am not at all clear that any has been given on this subject. I understood the Financial Secretary to say that there were certain obstacles in the way of remedying the improper collection in England and Ireland on account of the long practice and a Parliamentary pledge. As to the long practice, is it or is it not in accordance with the law? The law with regard to the collection of this Imperial revenue is the same in all the three countries, and if there is a long practice which differentiates in favour of two countries as against the other one, the sooner it comes to an end the better. Then we are told that a Parliamentary pledge has been given upon the matter. We want to know what that pledge was. Was it that the practice of putting the law into force should be contrary to the letter of the law? If a bad practice, contrary to the letter of the law, is the subject of a Parliamentary pledge, why is not the
law rectified so as to put on an equal footing the three countries of the United Kingdom? As regards the excuse of the time being inopportune for a change, that is altogether beside the point. The hon. Gentleman says that this is a time of a high income tax. Unfortunately it is. He says, further, that it is not a time to propose to extract it from the pockets of the taxpayers at an earlier period than has been the custom hitherto. That altogether misses the point. The result of this improper collection is to-deprive the Imperial revenue of £;30,000 per annum. The higher the tax the greater the loss. Therefore, the argument of the tax being high is rather in favour of my contention that the sooner this bad and illegal or improper practice is brought to an end the better. It will be better in two respects: the practice will be brought into conformity with the law, and there will be a large gain to the revenue on account of a larger proportion of the tax being collected than has previously been the case. In order to test this question I would urge my hon. friend to press the matter to a division.
With regard to the question referred to by the hon. Member for West Renfrewshire, I should recommend the hon. Member to rest satisfied with the pledge which has been given. There are two sets of parties aggrieved here. There are the assessors themselves, who fear that a new system is being introduced under which their interest is to be greatly prejudiced, and there are the county councils, the assessing bodies in Scotland which have hitherto been accustomed to take advantage of the excellent and well trained assessors for the purposes of the local assessments. In Scotland the system is such that the local assessments and the Imperial assessments are for the purposes of administration and valuation very closely interlocked, so that it is a hardship of which we are entitled to complain if this system is to be rashly disturbed. I understand, however, that a pledge has substantially been given that representations will be listened to with a not unfavourable ear, and I venture to prognosticate that, once these representations go to the proper quarter, there will be no doubt left in the minds of the officials at headquarters
that the present system, which has worked to the advantage of both the Imperial and the local authorities in Scotland, should be maintained. There is no pledge that that will be the result. All we have is a pledge that the representations will be listened to, and with that I, for one, am satisfied.
*MR. WEIR (Ross and Cromarty) called attention to the following foot-note which appeared on page 36 of the Estimates:;
"Certain Surveyors of Taxes in Scotland who are assessors under the Lands Valuation Act, and who have consequently to perform the duties of Registrars of Voters, receive various sums from local sources for their expenses and as remuneration for their services in preparing the voters rolls, register of county council electors, etc. According to the returns of those surveyors, the sums thus received by them for the year 1899&#x2013;1900 amounted in the aggregate to £;6,056 8s. 5d., out of which they claim to have defrayed expenses to the amount of £;1,453 19s. 4d., leaving £;4,602 9s. 5d. as the nett personal emolument derived from such sources by eighteen surveyors."
From a calculation he had made he found that this amounted to about £;255 each per annum. There was also an item of £;3,000 for commuted allowances in lieu of poundage to assessors in Scotland. He did not object to the amount of money paid, but to the manner in which the work was done. There ought to be some better system of assessing the deer forests which were inadequately assessed. The poor people had to bear much heavier burdens than they ought to bear, in consequence of the very light assessment of the deer forests. There was only one assessor for the counties of Ross, Cromarty, and Inverness, and it was physically impossible for one man to discharge such onerous duties efficiently. He hoped the hon. Gentleman would look into this matter.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: I will promise the hon. Member that I will make a full inquiry into the matter, although the information I have at present does not lead me to suppose that the assessor for Rossand the adjacent counties is overworked.
SIR WALTER FOSTER (Derbyshire, Ilkeston) said that with reference to the collection of the income tax in Scotland
he congratulated the sister kingdom upon setting a good example to England. It was much to the credit of the Scotch income-tax payers, and also to the system of collection, that they had paid their taxes so promptly, for it gave great advantages to England. He thought the collection of the income tax in this country was done in a very slip-shod and unbusinesslike way, and the work was evidently done much better in Scotland. In England the collection of the income tax was sometimes allowed to drift even into the month of April, and that was a method which would not succeed in private affairs. He supported his hon. friend's motion for this reduction in the hope that the businesslike arrangement which had been so successful in Scotland would be introduced both in England and Ireland.
SIR JOHN LENG (Dundee) said he should like to know whether in future years the collection would be made in England simultaneously with Scotland. If not, he thought that Scotland would be entitled to a discount. It might be said that as the income tax was very high, the time to do this was inopportune at the present moment, but it was also inopportune for the people of Scotland to pay the income tax three months in advance of England. In several matters of this kind Scotland set England a good example, but England was always too tardy and unwilling to follow such good examples. It was about time something was done in this matter. The people of Scotland were quiet, modest, and amiable individuals, but they were now being put upon, and their very virtues were made to tell against them. Although they did their work better in Scotland, their officials were paid less for doing it than in England. He thought it was quite time that they showed a little more spirit, instead of permitting themselves to be punished and penalised for setting an example to England which England did not follow.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 113; Noes, 165. (Division List No. 221.)
AYES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Harwood, George
O'Malley, William
Ambrose, Robert
Hayden John Patrick
O'Mara, James
Asquith, Rt Hon Herbert Henry
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire
Hayter, Rt. Hn. Sir Arthur D.
Palmer, George Wm. (Reading)
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Partington, Oswald
Bell, Richard
Holland, William Henry
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Blake, Edward
Horniman, Frederick John
Pirie, Duncan V.
Boland, John
Jacoby, James Alfred
Power, Patrick Joseph
Boyle, James
Joicey, Sir James
Rea, Russell
Brigg, John
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Reddy, M.
Bryce, Rt. Hon James
Kay-Shuttleworth, Rt Hn Sir U
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Burke, E. Haviland-
Kennedy, Patrick James
Reid, Sir R. T. (Dumfries)
Burns, John
Lambert, George
Rickett, J. Compton
Burt, Thomas
Leamy, Edmund
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Leng, Sir John
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H.
Lewis, John Herbert
Schwann, Charles E.
Causton, Richard Knight
Lloyd-George, David
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick B.)
Colville, John
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Craig, Robert Hunter
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Crean, Eugene
M'Dermott, Patrick
Sinclair, Capt. J. (Forfarshire)
Dalziel, James Henry
M'Killop, W. (Sligo, North)
Spencer, Rt Hn C. R. (Northants
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
M'Laren, Charles Benjamin
Strachey, Edward
Delany, William
Markham, Arthur Basil
Sullivan, Donal
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.)
Mooney, John J.
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Dillon, John
Morgan, J. L. (Carmarthen)
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Donelan, Captain A.
Morley, Charles (Breconshire)
Walson, John Lawson (Leeds, S.
Doogan, P. C.
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Duffy, William J.
Moss, Samuel
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Dunn, Sir William
Moulton, John Fletcher
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Murphy, John
Weir, James Galloway
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Whiteley, George (York, W. R.)
Fen wick, Charles
Norman, Henry
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Yoxall, James Henry
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr. Caldwell and Mr. Wallace.
Gladstone, Rt. Hn Herbert John
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
NOES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir A. F.
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Hamilton, Marq. of (L'dnderry
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert W.
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'rd
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Bain, Col. James Robert
Cranborne, Viscount
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Balcarres, Lord
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Heaton, John Henniker
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Crossley, Sir Savile
Helder, Augustus
Balfour, Rt. Hn. G. W. (Leeds
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Henderson, Alexander
Balfour, Maj. K. R. (Christch.)
Denny, Colonel
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Banbury, Frederick George)
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Hobhouse, Henry (Somerset, E.
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Dixon-Hartland, Sir F. Dixon
Hope, J. F. (Sheffi'ld, Brightside
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Hozier, Hon. James Henry Cecil
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Elliot, Hon. A. Ralph Douglas
Hudson, George (Bickersteth)
Bowles, T. G. (King's Lynn)
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Jessel, Captain Herbert Merton
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Finch, George H.
Kennaway, Rt Hn. Sir J. H.
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Kimber, Henry
Bullard, Sir Harry
Fisher, William Hayes
Knowles, Lees
Campbell, Rt Hn J. A. (Glasgow
FitzGerald, Sir Robt. Penrose-
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth
Cautley, Henry Strother
Garfit, William
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Darbysh.)
Gordon, Hn J E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Lawson, John Grant
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Gore, Hn. G. R C Ormsby- (Salop
Lee, A. H. (Hants, Fareham)
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Gore, Hn. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J. (Birm.
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir J. Eldon
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Worc'
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Long, Col. Chas. W. (Evesham)
Chapman, Edward
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S
Charrington, Spencer
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Longsdale, John Brownlee
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G. (Mid'x
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Spencer, Ernest (W. Bromwich)
Macdona, John Cumming
Pretyman, Ernest George
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire)
Purvis, Robert
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M 'Taggart
Majendie, James A. H.
Pym, C. Guy
Stone, Sir Beniamin
Malcalm, Ian
Quilter, Sir Cuthbert
Stroyan, John
Maple, Sir John Blundell
Randles, John S.
Strutt, Hon. Charles Hedley
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Reid, James (Greenock)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfries.)
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Thornton, Percy M.
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Rentoul, James Alexander
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Milton, Viscount
Renwick, George
Valentia, Viscount
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Ridley, Hon. M. W. (Stalybr.)
Vincent, Col Sir C E H (Sheffield
Moon, Edward Robert Pacy
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Vincent, Sir Edgar (Exter)
More, Robt. Jasper (Shropshire)
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Wanklyn, James Leslie
Morgan, David J (Walthams'w
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
Morrell, George Herbert
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E (Taunton
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Royds, Clement Molyneux
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts.
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Rutherford, John
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Wills, Sir Frederick
Muntz, Philip A.
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Murray, Rt Hn A Graham (Bute
Seton-Karr, Henry
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Myers, William Henry
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Parker, Gilbert
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Pease, Herbert P. (Darlington)
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks)
Pemberton, John S. G.
Spear, John Ward
Original Question put, and agreed to.
2. Motion made, and Question proposed, "That a sum, not exceeding £;5,528,810, be granted to His Majesty, to complete the sum necessary to defray the Charge which will come in course of payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902, for the Salaries and Expenses of the Post Office Services, and Expenses of Post Office Savings Banks, and Government Annuities and Insurances, and the Collection of the Post Office Revenue."
MR. BEYCE (Aberdeen, S.): I desire to address a question to the Secretary to the Treasury in regard to the delay in the building of the new post office at Aberdeen. This post office has been for a long time under the consideration of the Government, and the Vote which is proposed in this year's Estimate is but a small one. I am not going to enter into detail, but I wish to ask the hon. Gentleman representing the Post Office to press on this work, which is proceeding much too slowly. This is a question of much importance to my constituency, and I hope that next year a larger Vote will be taken, which will enable the work to proceed more rapidly. Owing to various causes the work has been so much delayed that the postal administration of Aberdeen is carried on under the greatest possible difficulties, and to the great inconvenience of the inhabitants
of the district. Therefore, I am very anxious to obtain from the hon. Member representing the Post Office some assurance that next year steps will be taken to accelerate the work, and that in the meantime efforts will be made to secure the necessary accommodation to enable the postal work to be carried on better than at present.
*SIR MARK STEWART (Kirkcudbrightshire) called attention to the increase of Sunday labour in the Post Office Department, and moved a reduction of the salary of the Postmaster General in order to bring before the House this question, which was one of great importance. This subject was not being brought before the House for the first time, for it was a question upon which very strong views were held by many persons who wished, as far as possible, to give a day of rest to those who were working in the Post Office. So long ago as the year 1864 this question was brought before the country by the Committee of the Working Men's Lord's Day Rest Association, who in 1864 commenced to agitate throughout the country for the reduction of Sunday labour in the Post Office Department. Since that date there had been a gradual increase in the numbers employed by the Post Office. In the year 1867 a Parliamentary Return was obtained by Sir Thomas Chambers, from which it was ascertained that at that time there were
25,902 persons of all ranks employed in the postal service, of whom 20,961, or more than four-fifths, were at work on the Lord's Day. Since that time, as he had already said, there had been a vast increase in the new servants employed by the Post Office, and the number now employed by the Post Office amounted to about 41,000. He would pass on to the figures which he wished to quote as quickly as he could. In the year 1870 the late Sir Charles Reed, M.P. for Hackney, proposed to move in the House of Commons on the 5th of August the following resolution;
"That the employment by the State of upwards of 20,000 persons in the Department of the Post Office on the Sabbath Day is not justified by any public necessity, and that, in the opinion of this House, it is desirable that the exemption from Sunday labour enjoyed by the letter carriers of London, Edinburgh, Belfast, Glasgow, and 114 other post towns, should be extended to all letter carriers and rural messengers throughout the United Kingdom."
This resolution did not come on in August, 1870, but Sir Charles Reed proposed his resolution in the House of Commons on the 18th of April, 1871, and Mr. Gladstone suggested in its place a resolution in the following terms, which was unanimously agreed to;
"That this House deems it desirable to reduce by all prudent means the Sunday labour now performed by public servants, and that it is expedient that an official inquiry should be instituted with a view to ascertaining how far it may be practicable to effect a further reduction of the labour now performed on Sunday by the letter-carriers and rural messengers in the service of the Postmaster General."
A Commission was appointed to carry out this resolution, and it consisted of Lord Dalhousie, Sir George Grey, and the then Postmaster General, the Right Hon. W. Monsell. The cause advocated by Sir Charles Reed was supported by 2,103 petitions, with over 200,000 signatures. This Commission issued their Report in December, 1871, and the chief alterations they suggested were as follows;
(1) The abolition of a rural post on Sundays at the request of the persons who receive two-thirds of the correspondence, instead of, as formerly, at the request of those who received six-sevenths of the correspondence.
(2) A Sunday rural post not to be put on except at the request of the receivers of two-thirds of the correspondence of the district.
(3) The providing of a substitute on alternate Sundays at an estimated expense to the department of £;4,500 per annum for rural messengers who travel more than fourteen miles daily. (This distance has since been reduced to twelve miles daily.)
(4) The closing of town receiving offices on Sundays, one head office only remaining, open.
In 1887 a Select Committee was appointed to consider the whole question of Sunday labour in connection with the Post Office outside the metropolitan district. The Committee reported on the 10th of August that year and recommended (1) that the collection and despatch and the delivery on Sundays of books, circulars, and printed matter, other than newspapers, be discontinued, and (2) that the collection and despatch and the delivery of letters on Sunday be in future discontinued. The Committee went further, and recommended;
"that the indoor duties of the Post Office service shall be so arranged as to relieve all sorting clerks and indoor officials so far as possible on alternate Sundays."
From a Parliamentary Return obtained in 1894 by the late Earl of Harrow by, in the House of Lords, it appeared that the total number of persons employed in the service of the Post Office in the. United Kingdom at that time was 136,447. The number at rest on Sundays was 95,173, and the number at work, 41,274. The number of those at, work on Sunday was thus shown by this Return to be more than double the number at work on Sundays in 1867, and this notwithstanding the resolution unanimously carried in the House of Commons in April, 1871. In 1899 another innovation was made with the best possible intention by the late Postmaster General. That was the establishment of the express delivery of letters in and around London on Sundays for a fee of 3d. per mile for each letter. Anyone receiving a letter ten miles off would have to pay 2s. 6d. That met with no favour on the part of the public, owing to the dearness of the delivery. In 1899 there were 71 special letters delivered in London, and last year the number was only 56. That practically was a proof of failure, and he could not say, personally, from the point of view he now took, that he regretted it.
There were one or two matters her wanted specially to bring before the Finan-
cial Secretary. He asked whether the service on Sunday was to be obligatory and compulsory That he thought was a very important matter. No doubt in the first instance all the Sunday work was done by volunteers. That was to say, men came from the outside to do the work and there was no compulsion whatever placed on the employees, but now, he believed the case was different. He believed that the present arrangement was adopted with good motives, possibly with the object of easing the labour and preventing men from being employed every Sunday, but he rather thought the policy of the Post Office now was to oblige the employees to work on Sunday. There was at one time a rule, made in April, 1898, that no man should work more than forty-eight hours per week without extra pay. If he worked on Sunday he got off so many hours on another day, or days, but now since March, 1900, he rather thought the rule was in desuetude, and the employees were obliged to work on Sundays; i.e., they were engaged on the understanding that if they were called upon to work they were obliged to do so. It might be that they were only called upon to work once in every four or five Sundays, but his complaint was that under the old regime they were not obliged to work on Sunday at all. Since March, 1900, they were obliged, and he should like that point to be made as clear as possible to the House. He was satisfied that the general feeling would be that there ought to be no compulsion in a matter of this sort. It was a conscience matter with the men. Many of them had Sunday duties to perform, such as the teaching of Sunday-schools, and he was quite certain that the House of Commons would not stand for one moment between these men and their consciences. There were no doubt many others who would be quite willing to do the work prescribed for them.
He trusted that the Committee would have a clear answer whether those men were or were not to be compelled to work on Sundays. A servant might be engaged to do certain work, and not necessarily to do other work, but if he was called upon to do that other work and refused, he might be told to go about his business. That was
likely to be the case with the Post Office employees. The older servants might not actually be compelled, but if they did not do what they were bidden when the turn of Sunday duty came to them, then they had the option of leaving or working. The Post Office, being one of the largest employers of labour in the country, he thought that in the matter of Sabbath observance it should set a fair and right example. He was quite sure one of the greatest blessings this country had at the present time was the rest from secular work which Sunday afforded. If Members of Parliament agreed with him in that he was sure it would be their utmost desire to give to others in the Departments over which they had control and authority the same precious benefit. This country would never have come to its present commercial supremacy if it had not, observed one day of rest in seven. Other nations had tried to dispense with Sunday rest, but they had not succeeded. We worked fresher than the people of any other nation, and we did more work than any other nation on the face of God's earth.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Item A (Salaries) be reduced by £;100, in respect of the Salary of the Postmaster General.";(Sir Mark Stewart.)
MR. E. J. C. MORTON (Devonport) said he did not wish to draw a red herring across the debate and to divert attention from the subject to which the hon. Gentleman had just called attention. He entirely agreed with the hon. Member's contention, but he wanted to refer to another point before the Financial Secretary to the Treasury replied. It was a point in which he thought the Post Office were not showing themselves the sort of employers they ought to show themselves to be. It was not a very large point, but it was one which he knew from his own constituency was very considerably felt by the employees of the Post Office all over the country. The ordinary employees of the Post Office might be divided into two classes. There were the ordinary carriers, who did the work outside, and there were the men who, although they were of the same
class and earned much about the same wages, were doing the clerical work and the work of stamping inside the Post Office. It had been the practice;and the practice had been recognised by the authorities of the Post Office;before 1st April, 1897, for postmen not only to expect gifts at Christmas and New Year's Day, but they were actually authorised to ask for Christmas boxes from those to whom they delivered letters. On 1st April, 1897, that practice was changed. The indoor men, as they are called;those employed inside the Post Office, and who were, therefore, unable to ask for Christmas boxes, not being in a position to present themselves at the doors of those who probably would have been willing to give gifts;received an allowance which was known technically in the Post Office as an allowance in lieu of Christmas boxes. It ranged from 2s. to 9s. a week. At the date named the allowances were abolished and the Christmas boxes were forbidden to be asked for. That was in accordance with the Tweedmouth Report. That system existed for a period of time;he believed between 1st April and the middle of July of that year. Therefore, it would be seen that, inasmuch as it ceased to exist in the middle of July, there was no opportunity for it applying in the case of the outside men who previously were entitled to Christmas boxes. It was found, after further consideration, that it would be impossible to enforce the rule against inviting Christmas boxes, and by the middle of July the order was rescinded, and the men were allowed in the future as in the past to ask for Christmas boxes and New Year's gifts. That practice, therefore, received no interruption whatever as a matter of fact, but, at the, same time, the allowance of the indoor men of from 2s. to 9s. was not re-established. The particular point he wished to ask was this;that the practice should be re-established according to the old calculation, and that there ought to be the same consideration given to the indoor men in lieu of the gifts, seeing that they could not obtain gifts at Christmas and New Year. He was informed that whereas previously there was no difficulty whatever in inducing outside men to do inside work, because the allowance was considered equivalent to their
somewhat precarious and irregular Christmas gifts, it now appeared that there was some difficulty in inducing them to do so. That was felt as a grievance, and he wished an assurance from the hon. Gentleman that the practice would be renewed.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: My hon. friend the Member for Kirkcudbright is anxious to have Sunday labour in the Post Office restricted as much as possible, and he is afraid that there has been a tendency to increase it in recent years. I can only say that the Postmaster General and the heads of the Post Office are as anxious to keep Sunday labour down as my hon. friend can be. At the same time, it must be obvious that in a busy establishment like the Post Office a certain amount of urgent work must be done on Sunday, if the public are not to be greatly inconvenienced, and if the Post Office is to carry on the duty for which it exists. My hon. friend cited comparative figures showing the numbers employed in years something like thirty years apart. The number in the later period was very much greater than in the earlier, but, of course, he must remember that the employees of the Post Office, and the new branches of work the Post Office has undertaken, have both increased largely during that time, and, having regard to that, I think he will see that a mere increase in the number actually employed must not lead him to suppose that there has been any desire to increase Sunday work unnecessarily. My hon. friend only referred, to a single instance of additional Sunday labour which has been cast upon the Post Office employees in recent years. That was in the case of the arrangements made by the late Postmaster General, the Duke of Norfolk, to secure the delivery of letters in London on the payment of an express fee of 3d. per mile. As my hon. friend says, that is almost prohibitive, and it is intended to be a prohibitive fee for ordinary purposes. That service was established only to meet cases of emergency, and it was not intended that it should be used except for such cases. I am not sorry, any more than my hon. friend, that it has not been taken advantage of to any large extent. As a matter of fact, the people engaged are two sorters and nine mes-
sengers for a period of about four hours each, so that this has not had a very large effect on the work of the Post Office. My hon. friend inquired whether the men were liable to receive notice to go if they declined to do Sunday duty. The rule in regard to Sunday duty will reduce to a minimum the work that must be done by each man. Formerly there was a sufficient number of volunteers to do the whole of the work, but latterly the number of volunteers for Sunday duty fell off, and there was an insufficient number for the work. Side by side with that, the Postmaster General found springing up a system by which certain of the older men volunteered for Sunday duty regularly every Sunday in the year. He did not think that if they were willing to undertake duty every Sunday in the year that was a thing which should be allowed, and he, of course, felt called upon to make such arrangements as would in the future spread the necessary Sunday duty more widely, and so prevent the men from having an undue amount of Sunday duty to do. That does not apply to men who have entered with a liability to give service on Sunday. Sorters since 1898 have entered on the express condition that they will take Sunday duty if called upon to do so. When men enter the service upon an express condition, which is clearly put before them, I do not think they can have any cause of complaint if they are subsequently called upon to fulfil that condition.
*SIR MARK STEWART: There were some who before 1898 were compelled.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: It only applies to those who have come in since 1898 subject to the rule. If my hon. friend knows the case of a man who was under no obligation to take Sunday duty when he entered the service, and who was compelled to take duty, I think the Postmaster General should have his attention called to it, with the view to a remedy. I think my hon. friend will see that such alterations as have been made in the allocation of Sunday duty have been made with the view of lessening that duty, and preventing it from falling on one man more than another. I think that is a much more satisfactory
solution than that a few men should he working every Sunday, and I hope my hon. friend will be satisfied with the explanation I have given.
MR. THOMAS BAYLEY (Derbyshire, Chesterfield) said he wished to call attention to serious grievances which certain classes in the Post Office had at the present time. These grievances were growing from year to year. The hon. Baronet who raised the question of Sunday work gave an account of what had been done by several Committees of the House of Commons which had gone into the grievances of Post Office servants with regard to Sunday work, but unfortunately the late Government and this Government had not acted on the principle which was acted upon in years gone by;namely, that steps were taken to redress grievances of servants engaged in the Departments of the State when their existence was satisfactorily shown to the House of Commons. They had the experience of what was called Lord Tweedmouth's Committee. That was a Committee outside this House of Parliament. It was a Committee of highly respectable gentlemen belonging to the other House, and permanent officials were the representatives of the Post Office on that Committee. It was appointed on an absolutely wrong principle. If the Government did not grant a Committee to inquire into the grievances of the men, the dissatisfaction would go on increasing in force. What they had asked for was a Committee of business men of this House to go thoroughly into their grievances, and to report to this House and the Government in what way these could be redressed. This was a constitutional question. This House itself had a right to look into matters affecting the interests of all servants who were paid for out of the rates, whether soldiers, sailors, Post Office officials, or permanent servants of any sort. It was this House's duty to pay them a fair remuneration for their services, and to redress their grievances. This House showed a want of moral courage by throwing that responsibility on the other House or the permanent officials of any Department whatsoever. The position of the lower paid servants
called for attention. If they considered the number of miles the men who delivered letters in the villages had to walk, he thought the Committee would say that the pay they received was very little indeed. These men would be perfectly satisfied if the Government would consider their position in relation to that of workers in the trades of the country;railway servants, miners, engineers, and even our own soldiers and sailors, who had received within the last five years considerable increases in their wages. If they took the Returns issued by the Board of Trade they would find that the conditions of those employed in the various trades had been greatly improved. If he remembered right, the increases of wages ran from 5 to 15 per cent. within the last five years. But there had been no increase in the wage of the lower paid Post Office servants corresponding to that, and they had a right to come to this House through their representatives and ask for a Committee of the House to investigate their grievances, and to see whether anything could be done to redress them. The Post Office representative in this House gave him no encouragement when he asked him a question on the subject some time ago. He could assure the hon. Gentleman that the Post Office servants had a number of friends in the country who wanted to treat them fairly and properly. It would be much better if the Government gave this Committee of Inquiry. He thought he could pledge those connected with the Post Office service who had grievances that if, after they had been brought before the Committee, the Committee decided against them, they would loyally abide by that decision.
*MR. JOHN DEWAR (Inverness-shire) said that in some parts of Scotland and in the Western Islands the inhabitants only got their letters once a week, and in some cases once a fortnight. In fact, he knew of an island of 500 inhabitants which had only received the news of the death of her late Majesty the Queen nine days after it happened. Now, these were fishing districts, where it was specially necessary that there should be immediate communication with the outside world. He had directed the attention
of the Postmaster General to the subject, but had been told, as politely as possible, that the concession he desired could not be granted because it would not pay. That was no proper answer to give. These inhabitants were entitled to the ordinary rights of British citizens, and that, so far as the Post Office was concerned, was not summed up in a delivery of letters once a week or once a fortnight. They only got the weekly newspaper five or six days after publication, so that their news was frequently a fortnight old&#x0021; They were told that a more frequent delivery would not pay; but these people paid the Imperial taxes, they paid for the public parks in London which they never saw, and all their other taxes, and they were entitled, surely, to get the ordinary rights of British citizens. They did not ask for a delivery every day, but, say, twice a week. It was very bad policy for the Department to say that a more frequent delivery would not pay. He found in looking back to a speech delivered by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1897 that he estimated that 16 millions of letters were called for, and he promised to the House that a house-to-house delivery would be given to nearly all the rural districts in the country. Last year's Report showed that nearly 55 million letters were brought into the delivery, and he had no doubt that now 70 or 80 million letters were brought into the delivery. That ought to indicate the neglect which the Post Office authorities had inflicted on the rural districts. If they wanted to make life more tolerable in these remote parts, surely one of the first things they should give them was the civilising influence of the postman.
He believed that the Post Office was not so much to blame as the Treasury. There was a letter in The Times recently, written by a man who evidently wrote with inside knowledge, and, with the permission of the Committee, he would quote a few sentences from that letter:;
"The Treasury regard the Post Office as a Department from which they are justified in expecting and demanding a continually increasing net revenue. They consequently look with a most jealous eye upon any proposal by the Postmaster General involving an increase of expenditure, lest it should interfere with the development of this net revenue. And hence it comes about that in Post Office improvements and reforms the Treasury, and not the
Postmaster General, determines whether they shall be carried out or not. The initiative lies with the Post Office, but the Chief of that Department has to do battle with the Secretary of the Treasury on every occasion when an improvement involving an increase of its expenditure, or a reduction of income is proposed. The Secretary to the Treasury is, as a rule, overworked. He is unable to go fully into details. It results that one of the Treasury clerks has to advise him, and the determination rests with this officer, who has no knowledge of the interior working of the Post Office, and no means of gauging the wants of the public, and whose main duty it is to maintain and increase if possible, the Revenue. The Postmaster General may contend that a particular improvement which he proposes is urgently needed, that after a time it will recoup the first outlay or loss by causing an increase of business; but the Treasury official, with the omniscience bred in the atmosphere of that Department, knows better, and, fearful of the immediate loss to the Revenue, advises a refusal. Every Postmaster General in turn has experienced this, and has seen his proposals overruled by the Treasury. Sometimes, when he is fortunate in being on most friendly terms with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, he is able to secure a more favourable response to his proposals; but as a rule they are rejected or delayed for years until public opinion, acting through the House of Commons, forces them upon the Government. No one at the Post Office has been able to discover on what precise lines or policy these refusals are made; but it may be assumed that the object is to secure a continually increasing net revenue."
He would suggest that the Committee should authorise the Postmaster General to give the country these reforms, and he was sure that the country would not grudge but approve of the slight additional expense. The writer of the letter then proceeded to point out that the Post Office revenue had nearly doubled in the last thirty years, having risen from £;1,814,000 to £;3,576,000, an increase at the rate of £;55,000 a year. He would point out that the proportion of profits from Scotland was £;375,000 a year, and therefore they were entitled to obtain additional postal facilities in Scotland. The net increase of the Post Office revenue was maintained by a system of starving the recommendations of the Postmaster General and his staff. When the Post Office Estimates were under discussion on the 1st of June, 1899, General Laurie, the Member for Pembroke, had a motion on the Paper to reduce the salary of the Postmaster General by £;100. The Member for Caithness urged that there should be a daily delivery in his constituency, and the Member for Montgomery
followed on much the same lines. In reply the present President of the Board of Agriculture, then Financial Secretary to the Treasury, used the following words:;
"The question of a daily delivery was raised by the hon. Member for Caithness. I believe it is a fact that in some parts of Scotland we have not yet been able to carry out a daily delivery; but, of course, we are going steadily forward with the work, and I hope that very soon the whole of the country will be so served. I should say that three-fourths of the whole country have been already accommodated with a daily delivery, and the Department hopes that within a time, measured by months, there will be daily deliveries everywhere."
That so pleased General Laurie that he withdrew his motion. That speech was delivered two years ago, and he challenged the representative of the Postmaster General now in the House to show that a daily delivery throughout the country was not the policy of the Government when that speech was made, and why that policy had not been carried out since. They were entitled to ask whether that policy had been prevented being carried out by the Treasury. Again he would demand that the Government should give the people in the Highlands and Islands a postal delivery not less frequently than at least twice a week.
MR. CATHCART WASON (Orkney and Shetland) said that his hon. friend had not stated fully the case specially of the districts where there were stormy seas between the islands and the mainland. There they did not get a weekly delivery, even, and they claimed that they should have at least a delivery of letters twice a week. They were cut off from all possible means of communication, and were frequently quite unable to obtain medical attendance. Life, under such circumstances, was a very serious thing indeed. He hoped the hon. Gentleman in charge of this Vote would not treat this matter lightly. In these remote islands they had some of the finest population in the United Kingdom, and the only means of communication which they had with the mainland was the post office. It was no answer to the demand they made to say that the additional service would not pay. They must regard the Post Office service as a whole, and as a whole the service did pay. He trusted
the matter would receive the earnest attention of the Post Office and the Treasury.
MR. SCHWANN (Manchester, N.) said that nobody seemed to be aware that this Vote was coming on, and therefore he felt that there would not be such a full debate upon it as might have been wished by many Members. He heartily supported the hon. Member who had moved the reduction of the Vote. He knew that there were great grievances unredressed on the part of the Post Office employees. Some of these grievances had been threshed out and remedied to a certain extent, no doubt, between the Duke of Norfolk, who was then Postmaster General, and the present President of the Board of Agriculture. But at the same time there was a rankling feeling as to the decision of the Committee. He thought it was a mistake on the part of the Government that they did not appoint some representative of the employees in the Post Office on that Committee of Inquiry, in order that their case should be heard, and that the sources of their dissatisfaction with their present condition might be traced. It might be said that they would have had only one vote on the Committee, but, at any rate, the employees would have been able to bring their case fully before the other members of the Committee. He did not propose to dwell on the whole range of the grievances of the employees in the Post Office, because certain Members had charge of the different branches; but he wanted to direct the attention of the representative of the Postmaster General in the House of Commons to the case of the non-establishment men in the engineering department of the telegraphs. They claimed that they ought to have the same benefits as were accorded to the unestablished men in other departments of the Post Office. It had been used as an argument against unestablished engineers receiving the stripes, which carried extra allowance, that auxiliaries, who did not work a full day, ought not to have this advantage. But the unestablished engineers did now work the whole day. They were as much daily workers as any other employees in the service. In these other departments
five years service carried an additional 1s. per week pay, but that additional pay was not given to the engineers, although some of them had had thirteen, fourteen, and fifteen years of service, and only 500 out of 3,000 men employed on the engineer service were on the establishment. Then there was the grievance of all classes of postmen and telegraphists as to deferred pay. If a postman or telegraphist died, his widow or children, under certain circumstances, were left without any compensation or any portion of the pension. He thought it was only right that some portion of the deferred pay should be awarded to the children and the widow, as the probability of a man receiving a pension was taken into account in fixing his wages. Lord Welby had pointed out that only 30 per cent. of the postmen reach pension age, and it was only right that something should be done for the widows and children of the remaining 70 per cent. That view had been supported by the late Lord Playfair. Then there was the question of the stagnation of promotion in the telegraph department, which had been agitated for a number of years, and he trusted that the hon. Member the Financial Secretary to the Treasury would give some consideration to it, seeing that there had been such a considerable rise in rents in the large as well as the small towns in England. It would be the desire of the House to have a Committee of the House to go into this question and have a decision with regard to the matter. It had been very desirable to have a Committee to investigate the question of the War Office. That Committee had reported, and as business men they had made practical suggestions to the nation, and a similar result would, no doubt, be the outcome of similar Committees sitting upon and investigating other Departments of State, which would obtain considerable advantage in consequence of their methods being sifted. He would not detain the House further, but if a division was demanded he should certainly support the Amendment, not out of any hostility to the Postmaster General, who, he believed, showed a very conciliatory spirit in this matter, but because it would be a great benefit to lave such a Committee.
MR. JAMES HOPE (Sheffield, Brightside) desired to say a very few words in answer to the criticisms that had been passed upon the action of the Post Office, which had been accused of want of business initiative. One often heard the same criticism of lack of initiative and business method and enterprise on the part of the Post Office officials, but he had had some knowledge of these men and had worked with them, and he was quite sure from what he had seen that His Majesty and the public could not wish for better public servants. When they were accused of all these faults, he would ask what chance had they of initiating and carrying on their business in a businesslike spirit under the present financial system of the country. They made millions a year for the revenue, but they did not touch a penny of it themselves. They were like the monkey in the story, who was always finding water but was never allowed to drink. The Post Office had not the same freedom as the Army and Navy and other great Departments of State, where any deficiency in any Vote could always be made up out of the excess of another Vote. In the case of the Post Office no such discretion was allowed, and consequently useful measures had to stand still for months in spite of the money which poured into the Post Office on every hand. The Post Office was in an anomalous position; it ought to be one thing or the other; and if it was to be looked upon in the same light as the Customs or the Board of Revenue, then the present system would have to be abolished, and it must be put on the same footing as those Departments, and the system of transfer which was in operation in the Army and Navy Departments extended to it, so that they might have the inducement to economise and have the benefit of their own savings. Let the Postmaster General have something to say as to the disposal of his surplus profits. Let there be a certain minimum revenue, and when once that is paid let the surplus profits be divided between the Treasury and the Post Office, and that which goes to the Post Office be devoted to extending the Post Office strictly on business lines. If the Post Office made £;3,500,000, £;3,000,000 should go to the Treasury and the
remainder should be equally divided. Under the present financial system it was very unfair that the Post Office officials should be criticised in the manner they were.
MR. BELL (Derby) wished in a very few words to support the suggestion of the hon. Member for Chesterfield that a Committee should be formed to consider the grievances of the postal employees. It was, he thought, Utopian to hope to find such a large number of workers without a grievance, and some of the grievances might be sentimental, but what he complained of was that there were a variety of grievances which were not looked into. He did not think any advantages would be gained by discussing in detail the grievances of the employees, because this Committee had no power to rectify them, but the Postmaster General would move in the direction of the wishes of these thousands of men by appointing a Committee to inquire into their grievances. By allowing these grievances to accumulate the position became very much like that of a boiler with a man sitting on the safety valve. The grievances would be so bottled up that sooner or later there would be an explosion. It was not desirable that there should be any such difficulty in a public department as a strike, but nothing tended so to work men up into a state of revolt as to allow their grievances to accumulate when they might be attended to at once. If a Committee were appointed to inquire into this matter and report, it would do no harm, and might do a great deal of good, and he hoped the Secretary to the Treasury would give some assurance on behalf of the Postmaster General that this would be done. Complaints had been made from the Front Government Benches as to the accumulation of questions on the Paper, and therefore he thought he would not put down a question which he desired to ask of the hon. Gentleman, but would send it direct to the Postmaster General, and so save the time of the House. Having sent a question to the Postmaster General last week he received the orthodox reply that his letter should receive attention, and he had not received the answer yet. He should repeat the question to-morrow to the Postmaster General, and ask for a
reply, and he would also furnish the Secretary to the Treasury with particulars, that he might inquire into the matter.
MR. HAY (Shoreditch, Hoxton) said he desired to support the motion of the hon. Member for Chesterfield for a Committee of Inquiry, and he did so for the reason that, having been for some years in contact with a considerable number of employees of the Post Office in London, he had found that there was a strong feeling that the departmental Committee did not meet the desire of the employees for a thorough investigation of their grievances. A new inquiry would, he thought, do a great deal to settle the unrest which undoubtedly existed in the minds of many of the employees of the Post Office. He could not but think the employees of the Post Office were justified in asking for an inquiry, having regard to the fact that six years had passed since any investigation was made into their position, and that the conditions of life had changed. He thought their demand for the reconsideration of their terms of pay and promotion was one that should commend itself to the attention of this Committee. Therefore, he hoped hon. Members would not run away with the idea that this Committee should not be appointed because this House was not a proper tribunal, but would grant the demand of these men, which was in his opinion a fair demand, and appoint a Committee to settle once and for all the fact of whether these grievances were just or not.
SIR WALTER FOSTER also supported the claim for a Committee of Inquiry into the general grievances of the Post Office employees. He had hoped some years ago that the Tweedmouth Committee would have settled these grievances, but he had observed with regret that every year since that Committee was appointed the demand for another Committee had greatly increased. He pressed the Secretary to the Treasury and the Government to seriously consider whether the best way out of the difficulty, and of getting a cheap and effective service all over the country, would not be to have a Committee to investigate the grievances of the Post Office employees. They had heard ex-
pression given to these grievances as to deferred pay and promotion, and the prospect of these men leaving their families unprovided for if they did not live to the pensioned age; and, although he did not suggest that their families should be awarded a pension, at the same time he thought that a compassionate allowance might be given in cases where the wife and family were left helpless by the removal of the breadwinner. Then there were the difficulties in which these men were placed by the increased cost of living and housing, especially in large towns. These questions required consideration, and he believed that a Committee, if appointed, would settle most of those matters. The House was bound, when this agitation had been going on for the last five years, to meet it by a Committee of Investigation, and inquire as to whether the grievances were real or otherwise. There could be no harm in meeting these questions with an impartial Committee, and upon that ground he urged upon the hon. Gentleman the Secretary to the Treasury the advisability of conferring with the Postmaster General on the subject. The Post Office was a great source of revenue to the country, and when a Service of the country gave a profit of millions a year to the Treasury it was disappointing and ominous of bad management that, after all the changes that had been made in the postal arrangements in London, in many respects Londoners were worse off than before. The means of communication were worse than they were five years ago; evening mails were collected earlier than they used to be, and there were not the means of communicating with the country that thorp were before the new arrangements were entered into. This was an immense retrogression which was discreditable to a great State Department. He also thought there ought to be increased facilities for answering letters at every post office. On the Continent facilities were given which were never accorded in England. The way to do business was to facilitate transactions with customers. He also wished to say that, in his opinion, many post offices in the country were not only badly equipped, but were ill suited to the work that went through them.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN said it would undoubtedly be for the benefit of the Post Office to facilitate the public service, but the Post Office must have some regard to the value of the object to be obtained by improvements and to the cost that would be incurred in carrying them out. Many persons thought that the Post Office should not be a revenue-producing department at all, but that was not his opinion. He hoped it would always be a revenue-producing department. He had considerable sympathy with the contention of the hon. Member for the Brightside Division of Sheffield, that out of the great increase of profits of the Post Office something should be expended in giving increased facilities to the public. On this occasion they were dealing with an expenditure which, on the postal and telegraph services combined, showed a greater increase than did the corresponding income. Improvements such as those that had been asked for could only be carried out gradually. He thought the object of the hon. Member for Chesterfield was to urge the Government to consent to a Committee of Inquiry to examine into the alleged grievances of the staff; and he said that if an impartial Committee was appointed all the supposed grievances of the men would be explained, that they would feel that they had had a fair hearing, that they would be satisfied with such a tribunal, and that no more would be heard of the questions raised year after year in the House when the Post Office Vote was down for discussion. That was a flattering picture of which everyone would approve, and no one more than those responsible for the Post Office. But what was the real fact? It was only six years ago since a Committee was appointed to consider all these matters. The Committee, which was of a most impartial character, took evidence with the greatest care and fidelity, and until the Report was given no fault was found with the composition of the Committee, and the employees certainly showed no reluctance to come before that Committee. The Committee reported in favour of a great many changes, and every recommendation that that Committee made the Government accepted and
carried out. Not only so, but when the Duke of Norfolk was Postmaster General some matters which had been overlooked, and had not been dealt with by the Tweedmouth Committee, were again inquired into. A Departmental Committee sat upstairs for three weeks, at which any member of the House might have been present, and could, if he had so wished, put questions to the witnesses examined. The result of that Committee was that still further concessions were made; the result to the public was an increased cost in the postal department of a half a million a year, and a corresponding benefit to the employees of the Post Office. What hope was there, therefore, if those Committees were not satisfactory, of another Committee following so soon in their footsteps being more successful than they? On behalf of the Postmaster General, he most strongly deprecated any reopening of inquiries, so recently undertaken, which had resulted in large changes in favour of the staff; but of any kind of inquiry which might be made he thought that which was suggested by the hon. Member for Chesterfield was the worst. He could imagine nobody less fit to examine the details of a great business like the Post Office and examine into the character of every man employed by that complex institution, and fix a fair pay, than a Committee of the House of Commons. He ventured to say that the object of the appointment of a Committee would only be to relieve Members of Parliament from the agitation to which they were now exposed. Nothing new had been adduced which was not before the previous Committee, which was most efficient and impartial. The Report of the Committee had been supplemented by further concessions given by the Committee presided over by the Duke of Norfolk; and what was now asked for was not an inquiry into new conditions of service or new grievances, but an attempt to go into all the demands which were recognised on the last occasion, and an endeavour to find a court of appeal to upset the judgment of the former Committee. There must be some finality about these matters, and he submitted that no case had been made out for any inquiry; and he believed that even if there were to be an inquiry, a
Committee of this House would not be the best form that it could take.
MR. E. J. C. MORTON (Devonport): The hon. Member has not said anything about the allowances.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: When the allowances to the indoor men were stopped, their wages were raised, and they have enjoyed the higher wages since, so that there was no reason for restoring the indoor allowances. New men were not in the same position, but they fully understood what the conditions of the service were.
MR. E. J. C. MORTON: My point is that the outdoor men had their wages readjusted because they were forbidden to ask for Christmas boxes, and now permission has again been given to them to ask for Christmas boxes, but the allowances of the indoor men have not been renewed.
MR. WILLIAM ALLAN (Gateshead) said he had heard with great regret the remarks made by the hon. Member representing the Post Office in this House. The hon. Gentleman seemed to dread the appointment of a Committee of investigation into the grievances of the employees; why he did so he did not know. He had said the Tweedmouth Committee settled the matter; that was true. There would have been no grievances with the officials if the recommendations of the Tweedmouth Committee had been carried out. Where was the £;190 limit given by the Committee? Why was not that given and retained? Why was it reduced to £;160? To come to the House under such circumstances and say that a limit had been reached was wrong. Why did the Government so dread the appointment of a Committee to investigate the grievances of these men, who work such long hours and go such long rounds, and whom the Government could not pay well, although they made a profit of £;4,000,000 a year? The hon. Member the Secretary to the Treasury did not as an individual believe it was the right thing to do, and why should he officially say that these grievances should not be redressed? We all want our grievances redressed in this world, and he was astonished that the hon. Gentleman, coming as he did from
such a business place as Birmingham, should not have granted the inquiry. He was in entire accord with the hon. Member for the Chesterfield Division, and was in favour of the appointment of this Committee, the opposition to which was an acknowledgment that something was wrong, and that therefore the Government did not want to grant it. He was for justice for all public servants, even to the extent of the hon. Gentleman himself, whose salary he would like to see increased, and he hoped when this Committee went to a division there would not be a man who would vote against the worst paid and longest worked servants of the State.
MR. J. WILSON (Glasgow, St. Rollox) said he did not know whether the postal staff had grievances or not, but, whether they had grievances or whether they had not, there was no reason why this Committee of Inquiry, which had been demanded by the whole body of the Post Office officials, should not be granted. He was surprised to hear the statement in opposition to this Committee. If it were found that these men had no grievances, no harm would be done, while if there really were grievances this inquiry would define them. The attitude taken by the hon. Gentleman was not at all satisfactory.
MR. COLVILLE (Lanarkshire, N.E.) agreed with the hon. Member who had just sat down, and joined issue with the Secretary to the Treasury that a Committee of this House was the least satisfactory to deal with a matter of this kind. Such a remark was a slur upon the business capacity of the members of that House. He could not imagine for a moment that the hon. Gentleman meant to convey that the House of Commons, which had to deal with such important questions, was not competent to form a Committee to deal with the grievances of the Post Office officials.
MR. CHARLES WILSON (Hull, W.) said the reply from the Secretary to the Treasury was disappointing. At the commencement of his remarks one thought he was going to grant a Committee of some kind, but to tell the House that it was not competent to deal with a matter of this kind was most disappointing;
but even supposing the hon. Gentleman was right in that statement, why could he not say he would grant some sort of inquiry, why not make some concession? He did not pretend to be acquainted with the subject, but he was told that some of the recommendations of the Tweedmouth Committee were not carried out.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: That is not so, they were all accepted and carried out.
MR. CHARLES WILSON said he did not know; something was said about £;190 and £;160, and he did not know how that might be, but at the same time he thought some concession ought to have been made.
*MR. DAVID MORGAN (Essex, Walthamstow) joined in the appeal of the Member for Chesterfield for this inquiry. Not only in the neighbourhood of London but in the rural districts of Essex there was a strong feeling that an inquiry should be held, and if the Committee would not listen to these proposals to have an inquiry now by a Committee of this House there would be continual dissatisfaction on the part of the Post Office employees. Everybody knew that where there was dissatisfaction in a great business establishment the only way to deal with it was to enquire into the cause and adjust it.
MAJOR KENNETH BALFOUR (Christchurch) also joined in the appeal for an inquiry. There was, no doubt, in the country a great body of opinion that there were real grievances and that they should be looked into. In the district he represented it took eighteen months to get a thorough revision of the staff carried out, and the result was that in the year 1898&#x2013;9 the staff was over-worked to the extent of 500 hours in the year. They worked 500 hours overtime. It therefore appeared to him that if there were these grievances or supposed grievances it could not be wrong to look into them from a point of view which would be acceptable to the men. If those grievances did not exist it would be explained to the men that they had no case, and if they did exist they could be remedied.
THE FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY (Mr. A. J. BALFOUR, Manchester, E.): I have listened with great interest
to this debate, and, I confess frankly, with considerable anxiety as to the future of the public service if pressure of the kind which has been put on the Government to-night is persisted in by this House. This House is omnipotent. It can make and unmake Governments. It can decide what, when, and how public money is to be spent. But with that omnipotence I would venture to urge upon Members their great responsibility in dealing with a subject like this. Everyone knows that a great organised body like the Post Office has it in its power to put great pressure upon Members, but I earnestly urge upon hon. Gentlemen that unless we take our courage in both hands, and say that, although most desirous that all legitimate grievances shall be dealt with, we cannot permit the Government as a great employer of labour to have this kind of pressure put upon it, I think the future of the public service is in peril. I assure the Committee that I speak with a great sense of responsibility. In this very case the Post Office employees have brought forward their grievances year after year. Two Commissions have been appointed, and no one ever ventured to impugn the ability or impartiality of the members of those Commissions. Those Commissions made the fullest examination into the case put before them, and reported at length, and as a consequence of that Report the British taxpayers are now paying half a million of money more than they did before, So that the Commissions have been productive of great pecuniary advantage to the Post Office employees. In none of the speeches has any specific complaint been brought forward, or any point urged which suggests the necessity for further enquiry, but only the statement that there is a feeling of uneasiness, and a desire for further examination, and that when such a desire is expressed the House should listen to it. We cannot keep the Civil Service in a sound and healthy condition if we are going to examine into it by a Committee every five years. If the House of Commons were to yield to the very natural temptation of granting a Committee such as has been asked for, though we might escape an inconvenient division we should be unworthy in my opinion of bearing any longer the great responsibility of being
the enormous employer of labour that we are. We should not be carrying out our duty to the public, and, worst of all, we should aim a blow at the Civil Service, which is the boast of this country and the envy of the civilised world, because we should become the parliamentary creatures of every organised body of public servants who chose to use the great power which the Constitution gives them for ends which I am sure they believe to be right, but which this House could not yield to in the manner now suggested without derogating from the high functions and spirit of pure impartiality which this House must maintain if Members are to do their duty by their constituents.
MR. JOHN BURNS (Battersea) said the Leader of the House, not for the first time, had told them that, if public-servants pressed for redress of their grievances, such pressure would be inconvenient and fraught with danger to the public service. But was not that a reason for the House of Commons to consider whether the present method of dealing with grievances was the right one? He ventured to suggest a better course. Whenever a body of public servants thought they had a grievance, what happened? They created a public opinion, and set afoot an agitation and a demand for a Royal Commission, and frequently, in a moment of panic, the Royal Commission was granted, not for the purpose of those who needed it most, but of those who were best organised. Another method was to ask for an investigation by a Committee, like the Tweed mouth Committee, consisting of a Member of the House of Lords and two permanent officials, who reported to the House of Commons, which mostly took no notice of their Report. Somehow or another, that Committee did not evoke trust and confidence from the men whose grievances it sat to consider. But that evening there had been, not a Royal Commission, not a Tweedmouth Committee, but the whole House of Commons, hour after hour, speaking of and listening to the grievances of postmen, telegraphists, and other employees. Of all tribunals to go into the grievances of Government servants, whether postal, naval, or military, the House of Commons as consti-
tuted was not the best, and he desired to suggest a fourth tribunal, which he believed the Government would be driven to adopt. He suggested that for every spending Department such as the Post Office, there should be sitting regularly or periodically a strong but small Committee of the House of Commons, composed of men from both sides, who would not yield to unfair pressure from postal employees, who would not be susceptible to State servants' clamour, and who could be trusted to do their duty to the State; and that this Committee should have sitting regularly with them the Postmaster General or two or three expert officials to help them, and they to help the head of the Department. In the event of that Committee thinking the demands of the postal employees unreasonable, fictitious, or not what their organisation made them out to be, it would be their duty to sit very severely upon them. Until every public Department had such a Committee as that, political pressure would always be brought to bear upon weak-kneed Members of Parliament. Until the House of Commons appointed such a Committee, money would be wasted and money would be granted to the wrong people, as was invariably the case when money was given as the result of a Government servants' agitation. Could this work? The Secretary to the Treasury had, in his opinion, showed, he would not say a contempt, but a disrespect for the House of Commons which he did not expect a democrat of his status and standing would display. He had said that of all possible tribunals there was none less fit than a Committee of the House of Commons. He (the speaker) differed, and would give the hon. Gentleman a precedent. When the War Office;notwithstanding all its protestations of efficiency, capacity, and readiness, down to the last button;got into a mess over South Africa, what happened? The House of Commons unanimously appointed three or four business men from both sides of the House to reorganise the business of the War Office.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: No.
MR. JOHN BURNS: Oh, but it did. Of course the hon. Gentleman would not
accept literally that view, but four or five men from both sides of the House, noted for probity, industry, and capacity in their private concerns, were elected as a Committee to do what? To draw up the conditions under which the War Office should manage the Army on businesslike lines. He wanted to see a similar Committee sitting in permanence for many of these grievances in connection with the Post Office. Private Bill Committees upstairs, as a rule, were drawn from the best Members of the House, and if such Committees could sit for weeks;in some cases for months;on large water, gas, or telephone Bills, or on subjects relating to business and private enterprise of every description, involving the employment of millions of money and of scores of thousands of men, there was no reason why there should not be a permanent Standing Committee of Members of the House of Commons attached to each of the large spending departments. If that were done, much fictitious agitation and improper pressure which was now resorted to would disappear. Why did he say that? When a large employer of labour had a grievance with his men he did not always take the advice of his foreman or his superintendent. No. Very frequently, when the manager or superintendent had gone too far, the employer intervened with the personal element, and, if he was a wise employer, corrected the superintendent on the one side or the men on the other. He desired the House of Commons to set up a Standing Committee of capable and firm men, who would crumple up any bogus agitation on the part of competent organisers, who would be the eyes of the House of Commons, and, in a rough way, the conscience of the House of Commons with regard to fair treatment for the men. Until such a permanent Committee was appointed, endowed by the House with power to put a stop to improper pressure, there would always be these annual demands for Royal Commissions and Committees of Inquiry, and, with all respect to postal and other grievances, the time of the House of Commons would be relatively wasted when the work could be so much better done by a small Committee upstairs;a Committee which would stand by the permanent officials when they were
right and correct them when they were wrong, as permanent officials sometimes were, as recent experience proved that the hub of the universe did not come up through the doorstep of the War Office or of the Postmaster General. If this were done the head of the department would not enjoy the discredit, as he undoubtedly now did, of being put up as the person who prevented a Committee of Inquiry looking into the grievances. Taking it with all its defects, he believed the British civil service to be the best in the world, and he wanted it to remain the best in the world. Government servants would do a foolish thing, and, from their own selfish point of view, one of the most dangerous things they ever could do, if they unduly occupied the time of the House of Commons with relatively trivial and selfish personal questions, wasting public time which ought to be given to higher political and Imperial questions.
He believed that the suggestion he had made was the only way out. Why did he say that? The County Council had 12,000 employees. Next to the Government it was one of the largest employers of labour in London. What did they do? What did Glasgow and Liverpool do? Their employees occasionally organised for the redress of grievances. Did the County Council accept the ipsissima rerba of the head of the fire brigade, or the parks department, on the main drainage? No, they put the grievances through the sieve of a small sub-committee, whose conclusions were revised by the main committee. The decision was then sent to the council to adopt or reject. What was good enough for our municipal life was good enough for the House of Commons. He believed that if a Committee were appointed the question would be permanently solved. What would happen? When this Committee presented its annual Report at the end of the Postmaster General's annual document, Members of the House of Commons would say, "Hallo&#x0021; A Committee have gone into this; they have given the men a fair show; they have discussed the grievances with the permanent officials and the men; we will vote for the Committee." In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred the House of Commons as a body would stand by the Report and recommendations of the
Committee. The result would be that men who really had grievances to be redressed would have them redressed, while the men who applied pressure improperly would get the punishment which every servant, whether private or public, had a right to receive for misstatements, or selfish or improper action. If some such scheme was not adopted the area of Government enterprise would be checked, permanent officials would be considerably inconvenienced, the tone of the service would be embittered and discredited. It was because he wanted the civil service to be as good as it at present was that he put forward this suggestion as an alternative to the negative proposal of the Secretary to the Treasury.
*MR. STUART WORTLEY (Sheffield, Hallam) said the speech just delivered by the hon. Member for Battersea was, in his opinion, a very courageous one. He did not, however, think that the hon. Member intended his speech to be what it actually was in substance, namely, a speech supporting the Government on the present issue before the House. The hon. Member manifested a great desire that a tribunal should be created which would dispose permanently of the question now before the Committee. He would point out that all the tribunals indicated by the hon. Member for Battersea were practically different from the proposal to appoint a Select Committee which was before them. The hon. Member for Battersea seemed to have got hold of the true idea, which was that there should be some tribunal to which grievances of this kind might be referred, and that tribunal should have in it an element of permanence and generality of view by not being confined, as the proposed Select Committee would be to the interest of one particular Department. The only thing which the hon. Member for Battersea apparently forgot was that it was necessary, whatever tribunal they adopted, that it should have complete independence, and be entirely free from the influence of what was called the vote-catching element. He hoped that hon. Members of this House would have the courage to say that they would not allow themselves to be open to influences of that kind.
The great unorganised majority of the people were interested in this matter, and they deserved to have the protection of hon. Members of this House. The hon. Member for Battersea pointed to the Private Bills Committees in this House, and paid them a tribute which they deserved, for being a tribunal whose competence and impartiality everybody was completely satisfied with. But the hon. Member evidently forgot that no Member of the House was allowed to serve on that Committee during the consideration of a Bill in which his own constituency was concerned. They could not protect the members of the Committee which had been suggested by the mover of this reduction from being influenced by their own constituencies.
He thought the Secretary to the Treasury had taken a broad and statesmanlike view of this question, and he agreed with him that a Committee of this House was not the best tribunal to deal with a matter of this kind. Perhaps it was true that, after all, the best tribunal to deal with a question of this kind was not a Committee consisting of gentlemen who valued, as every right-minded man did value, the privilege of sitting in this House. By the inevitable conditions of the case hon. Members did sit in this House largely by the votes of public servants. He thought there was set up some considerable time ago some sort of permanent Civil Service Committee for the purpose of adjudicating upon the claims of public servants. He did not know whether that Committee was in existence still, and he did not know whether it existed for a long or a short time. He thought it must have had in it that infirmity which marked the Tweedmouth Committee, which was a sort of domestic arrangement, and which consisted chiefly of members of the public service, and consequently did not command the necessary amount of confidence. That was the defect, if there was one, in the Tweedmouth Committee. Therefore he thought that any Committee appointed in the future ought not to be constituted in the way the Tweedmouth Committee was constituted. Any tribunal which was appointed in the future would have to be free from these influences if they wanted to secure absolute impartiality
and independence. It was a bad thing to have upon such a tribunal men who have been under electioneering pressure, and on the other hand it did not command public confidence to have persons on the tribunal whose official conduct was practically being arraigned. He wished that some kind of permanent tribunal could be invented, but he did not think that the hon. Member for Battersea had succeeded in placing before them the exact model. What he should like to see established was not the tribunal which had been proposed that evening. He trusted, therefore, as his right hon. friend the Leader of the House had said, that hon. Members of this House would take their courage in both hands and declare that this was a motion which would excite the hope among employees that something might be wrung from the Government by pressure upon Members of Parliament. Such pressure ought not to be exerted, and if the House of Commons gave way to that pressure to that extent hon. Members would be proceeding in the direction indicated by the Leader of the House.
For these reasons he hoped this motion would be negatived by a large majority of the Members of this House, and he believed it might be safely negatived without doing any injustice to this very large body of public servants. He was sure the Government would be disposed to consider whether they should not take time to see if some kind of tribunal could not be devised which would not have the infirmities attached to Departmental Committees on which sat representatives of the public department itself whose organisation was under discussion. On the other hand they should have on such a tribunal, besides the independence which he had already indicated, that permanence and general breadth of view which alone could be got by some body such as he had indicated. He did not know whether, under these circumstances, this motion would be defeated. He confessed that, if the motion was successful, he thought that all the evils indicated by the Leader of the House would be in great danger of being realised. He had sat in this House for many years, and he had seen motions dealing with the grievances of Post Office servants rejected over and over again by this House. In this particular case
they had not long ago the appointment of the Tweedmouth Committee, which gave an extraordinary amount of time and trouble to the discussion of this question. That Committee was undoubtedly composed of men against whom not a word could be said. Even though they might complain in respect of that Committee that its procedure was rigid and its composition unsatisfactory, or that one or two of its members, being public servants, might have had preconceived ideas on the matters at issue, they could not deny that they had since had what was practically a second Committee in the inquiry held by the present President of the Board of Agriculture. It was difficult to conceive of an inquiry carried on under more sympathetic and elastic conditions than the inquiry which was held by the right hon. Gentleman the President of the Board of Agriculture in conjunction with the Duke of Norfolk. The right hon. Gentleman was a man who was always ready to listen to all kinds of public complaints, and he dealt with them in a manner which gave satisfaction to his fellow-subjects. He hoped, therefore, that the present motion would not be pressed, because he thought there was a general desire amongst hon. Members that some better tribunal should be devised for the permanent solution of these constantly occurring questions. He hoped that this motion for the appointment of a Select Committee would be negatived by a large majority.
*MR. WEIR said that a few years ago they were promised further postal facilities in the rural districts, more especially in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland. The predecessor of the present Postmaster General did splendid work in this direction, and he regretted that he was not in office at the present moment. Recently things had been going back in this respect, and in many rural districts at the present time the postal facilities in some parts were extremely unsatisfactory. More frequent deliveries were much needed. When considering this question the Postmaster General seemed to decide solely upon the amount of correspondence, but that was not the principle upon which a great business ought to be conducted. Singer's Sewing Machine Company had
branches all over the world, and although some of those branches did not pay, they were kept going by the branches which did pay. He did not understand why the Post Office did not conduct their system upon sound business lines. When the Post Office had an enormous surplus of between £;3,000,000 and £;4,000,000, some part of it ought to be used in providing better postal facilities in the poorer districts. Instead of progressing they were standing still. He suggested that in certain districts the Post Office should follow the example of many business firms by using cycle carts. He would be glad to be relieved from the duty of constantly asking questions in regard to the postal service He hoped something would be done to improve the service in the Highlands. The right hon. Gentleman the Member for Preston had done much to improve the postal service throughout the country, and with his experience and grasp would have made an admirable Postmaster General. He thought more money-order offices might be provided in the Western Highlands for the use of the fishing population. Many of these people went to the east coast fishing, and when they wanted to remit money to their families they found there was a lack of money-order offices. If it were not possible to issue and pay postal orders at every rural post office arrangements might be made for these offices to conduct money order and savings bank business one or two days a week. A great department like the Post Office should not pursue the niggardly system of starving the poorer districts. The Post Office should treat them more liberally than hitherto. He asked what progress was being made with regard to the telephone system which was to be carried on by the Post Office, and also called attention to the fact that owing mainly to the loss of postal orders by the public the department gained some £;15,000 a year. He suggested that postal orders should be issued with a counterfoil which would enable the sender to recover the value of the order in the event of its being lost.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: The hon. Member has referred to the postal facilities given to the people of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland. He
represented to the House that there was some difference of opinion between the Post Office and the Treasury on this matter. He seems to be of opinion that the Post Office would be only too glad to make large extensions, but that some subordinate official of the Treasury, over whom neither my right hon. friend nor myself can exercise control, prevents the carrying out of the good intentions of the Postmaster General. I assure the hon. Gentleman that there is no such difference of opinion on these matters, and I may go further and assure him that both the Post Office and the Treasury are anxious to extend as far as circumstances permit postal facilities in the remote districts. The hon. Member has referred to the progress that was made when my right hon. friend the President of the Board of Agriculture was Financial Secretary to the Treasury and the Duke of Norfolk was Postmaster General. He does an injustice to the present occupants of those offices in going back to what was then done. A great step in advance was made then, but it should not be made a matter of complaint that we are not progressing at the same rate now. The Post Office could not afford to progress at the same rate. We hope to make progress by degrees, and to provide better facilities than exist at the present time. The hon. Member for Inverness and my hon. friend the Member for Orkney urged that the Post Office should not consider too closely whether certain services would pay or not, but should consider the service as a whole and the profit obtained there from, being content to work some of the services at a loss. I do not dispute that statement for a moment. That is the principle on which the Post Office works, but if we were to comply with every demand for increased facilities made upon us, the profit of the whole would disappear shortly, and we should have a loss instead. What is clear, and what I have indicated earlier in the evening, is that the policy of the Treasury and the Post Office for some time has been that the gross profit from the postal service should be divided between a contribution to the revenue of the country and the further improvement of the postal service. That is so already. Take the case of the mails
to Stornoway, which the hon. Member has frequently brought before the House. Does he imagine that service pays? Not a bit of it. The loss is between three and four times as great as the revenue derived from it. One reason for having this business conducted by the Government is that the cost may be more evenly spread, and that postal service may not be impossible in the scattered populations; but there must be some limit to that, and some regard must be had to the amount of business in particular localities.
There was one other question raised by the hon. Gentleman, and that was as regards the amount of money appearing in the Vote on account of money orders or Post Office orders which were lost, or from some cause not presented for payment. Some of them may be lost, some of them may be accumulating in the hands of the receivers, or some of them may be mislaid by receivers. A considerable part of the sum is due to the discount under which these orders are paid when they run for more than a certain period. The hon. Member is aware that if they are not cashed within a certain limit of time they are, after that time has expired, subject to discount. One suggestion the hon. Member made was that, for the purpose of identification, in the case of postal orders lost, there should be issued a counterfoil which could be kept by the senders. That is a point well worthy of consideration. My attention has not been drawn to it before, but I will confer with the Postmaster General about it and see whether anything can be done. A question was asked as to the Government system of telephones within the metropolitan area. I am afraid I have nothing more definite to add to what I said some weeks ago, when I stated that I expected that a considerable part of the system would be open before the close of the present year. Of course, it is in the interest of the Post Office and the Treasury, having embarked considerable capital on this, that we should open the service to the public, and endeavour to secure a revenue from it, at the earliest possible moment, and our efforts will be directed towards that object.
MR. FLYNN (Cork, N.) said he wanted to bring forward a case in which the Post-
master General had conducted the business most deplorably. Cork post office was a place where business had been growing enormously and the profits had been very large. Well, would it be believed that on account of a comparatively trifling sum of money the Post Office declined to accede to the representations made by the chamber of commerce and the people of that city with respect to the plans for the new buildings? The Postmaster General and his representatives in Ireland considered themselves better judges of what was required than the chamber of commerce and the people of Cork. It had been pointed out to the Postmaster General time and again that the buildings which were being erected would be totally inadequate to meet the accommodation required.
*THE CHAIRMAN: The question of post office buildings does not arise on this Vote.
MR. FLYNN said he would not pursue the subject further, for he presumed that at a later period he would have an opportunity of bringing it before the Committee.
MR. MOON (St. Pancras, N.) said the right hon. Member for the Hallam Division opposed the request that a Committee of this House should be appointed to inquire into grievances, on the ground that Members would be liable to pressure. There was no doubt that some Members of the House would be liable to pressure, but there was a large number of Members who would not. There were Members for rural districts and the Members for the Universities who would be peculiarly suitable to inquire into the grievances of the men. If such a Committee were appointed it would satisfy the wish of the employees. Men of judgment were wanted, and if the members of the Committee were drawn from the classes he mentioned there would be no risk of pressure.
MR. NANNETTI (Dublin, College Green) supported the proposal that an inquiry should be made into the grievances of the Post Office employees. He was surprised that the right hon. Member for the Hallam Division objected to the appointment of a Committee. The claims made on behalf of these men did not
come from any particular section of the House. He remembered attending several meetings of the men where this claim for an inquiry was brought forward, and letters were read from Conservatives and Unionists, Nationalists and Liberals. He was surprised to find that the promises made to the postal officials by these Members were not being followed up in the House now. What was wanted was a Committee that the employees would have confidence in;a Committee who would look seriously into the grievances of the men. He might state, with reference to his own constituency, that he was largely returned by the votes of the postal officials. Since he came into this House he had brought before the hon. Gentlemen opposite several grievances of those officials, but he was sorry to say that his efforts on their behalf had had very little effect. He had received many promises, but there had been no performance. He thought it was high time that an inquiry was held into the claims put forward, not from Ireland alone, but from England, Scotland, and Wales. One matter the men in Dublin had to complain about was a system called the three-shift system. It meant that the men were on duty from four in the morning till eight at night. Although they were not continuously at work during the whole of that time, they were at the service of the Government, and liable to be called upon.
MR. BANBURY (Camberwell, Peckham) remarked that the idea that the Post Office made a large profit, and that they might do something in cheapening the cost of letter postage, was a delusion, because if they did that they would have to increase the taxation of the State. Of course, what they took off with one hand they took away with another. This discussion had been rather vague, and he should like to allude to one little grievance which he had himself, and that was in regard to the horses employed in the mail carts in His Majesty's Service. He had inspected these horses, and had come to the conclusion that they were certainly, some of them at any rate, very far from being in a satisfactory state. Many of them were in a very poor condition, and doing very hard work. He thought it was not creditable to the State that these horses were not in as good condition as those employed by the
London County Council, the Tramways Companies, or the Road Car Company, than which no horses could be kept in better condition.
Having ventilated this grievance, he wished to say a few words as to the real question before the Committee, namely, the appointment of a Committee to inquire into the alleged grievances of postmen. When he was first elected in 1892 this question was brought under his notice, and he was asked whether he would support an inquiry into the grievances of the Post Office employees at that time. He was new to Parliamentary life, and it was pointed out to him that, if the inquiry could do no good, it, at any rate, could do no harm; and that it would show that if the grievances existed something might be done to remedy them. He said that he would vote for an inquiry, and when he was returned the question came before the House, and he announced that he would vote in favour of the inquiry. That inquiry was held by a Committee, of which Lord Tweed mouth was chairman. An hon. Gentleman opposite said the inquiry should be held by people in whom the men had confidence; but in whom could they have more confidence than Lord Tweed mouth, who could not be said to be in favour of the capitalists who were sometimes held up to such opprobrium? What was the result of the inquiry of that Committee? The wages of the Post Office officials were increased by £;400,000. In 1895 another inquiry was asked for, and, as far as he was personally concerned, he refused to join in the demand for it. It was, however, given, and he believed it was a fair and impartial inquiry; although his experience of the world told him that no inquiry would ever satisfy the men. That was only human nature; he was quite certain that whatever was offered to him himself would not appear sufficient for his services. The result of the second inquiry was a still further increase in the salaries of the Post Office employees, but still they were not satisfied, and they demanded a particular inquiry by a Committee of the House of Commons. He had at his last election told his constituents that he should refuse to accede to that request. He had sat on many Select Committees of the House of
Commons, and he could not conceal from himself that there was generally a political bias in these Committees. That was a very serious question for the nation when pressure was brought to bear on the disposition of the money of the taxpayers. During the nine years in which he had had the honour of having a seat in the House of Commons, one of the most serious questions that he had had to consider was the constant pressure which was brought to bear on Members of Parliament by civil servants to give them money which belonged not to them, but to the nation. If that sort of thing went on the time would come when the suffrage would have to be taken from civil servants. Supposing this Committee asked for were appointed, what would be the result? Every other branch of the Civil Service would require a Committee to inquire whether they were receiving the wages they ought to receive, and the result would be a com-
AYES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Harwood, George
O'Connor, T. P. (Liverpool)
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Hay, Hon. Claude George
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Ambrose, Robert
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Malley, William
Bell, Richard
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
O'Mara, James
Blake, Edward
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir A. D.
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Boland, John
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.
Partington, Oswald
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Holland, William Henry
Power, Patrick Joseph
Royle, James
Horniman, Frederick John
Priestley, Arthur
Brand, Hon. Arthur G.
Jacoby, James Alfred
Rea, Russell
Brigg, John
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Reddy, M.
Burke, E. Haviland-
Kennedy, Patrick James
Rickett, J. Compton
Burt, Thomas
Lambert, George
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Caldwell, James
Leamy, Edmund
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Channing, Francis Allston
Leng, Sir John
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Lewis, John Herbert
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Colville, John
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Sinclair, Capt. J. (Forfarshire
Craig, Robert Hunter
M'Arthur, Wm. (Cornwall)
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C. R. (N'th'nts
Crean, Eugene
M'Dermott, Patrick
Sullivan, Donal
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
M'Killop, W. (Sligo, North)
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Delany, William
Markham, Arthur Basil
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R)
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.
Moon, Edward Robert Pacy
Wallace, Robert
Dewar, T R (T'wrH'mlts S. Geo.
Mooney, John J.
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Dillon, John
Morgan, David J (Walthamst'w
Weir, James Galloway
Donelan, Captain A.
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Doogan, P. C.
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Whiteley, George (York, W. R.)
Dufly, William J.
Moss, Samuel
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Murphy, J.
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth
Fenwick, Charles
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'd
Flynn, James Christopher
Norman, Henry
Yoxall, James Henry
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Fuller, J. M. F.
Nussey, Thomas Willans
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr. Thomas Bayley and Mr. Schwann.
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Goeen, W. D. (Wednesbury)
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
NOES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Balfour, Rt Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Balfour, Rt. Hn. G. W. (Leeds
Allhusen, Augustus Henry E.
Balcarres, Lord
Banbury, Frederick George
plete subverison of all discipline. Under these circumstances, he hoped the House of Commons would not commit themselves to a Committee of Inquiry. If another Inquiry was necessary it should be made by persons who had a knowledge of the business, and who were not likely to be biased one way or the other. A Select Committee of the House would be the worst tribunal to which the matter could be referred.
MR. SCHWANN rose in his place, and claimed to move, "That the Question be now put."
Question, "That the Question be now put," put, and agreed to.
Question put accordingly, "That Item A (Salaries) be reduced by £;100, in respect of the Salary of the Postmaster General."
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 103; Noes, 148. (Division List No. 222.)
Bathurst, Hon. Allen B.
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G (Middx
Pretyman, Ernest George
Beach, Rt Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Hamilton, Marq of (L'nd'nderry
Purvis, Robert
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Hanbury, Rt. Hn. Rbt. Wm.
Pym, C. Guy
Bigwood, James
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd
Randles, John S.
Bowles, Capt H. P. (Middlesex
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Reid, James (Greenock)
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Helder, Augustus
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Bull, William James
Henderson, Alexander
Rentoul, James Alexander
Butcher, John George
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Renwick, George
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Hogg, Lindsay
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hope, J. F (Sheffield, Brightside
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. Chas. T.
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Hutton, John (Yorks, N. R.)
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.)
Kennaway, Rt. Hn. Sir John H.
Round, James
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r)
Keswick, William
Russell, T. W.
Chapman, Edward
Knowles, Lees
Rutherford, John
Charrington, Spencer
Lawson, John Grant
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Lee, Arthur H (Hants., Fareh'm
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse
Cochrane, Hon. T. H. A. E.
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Seton-Karr, Henry
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Long, Rt. Hon. W. (Bristol, S.
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Smith, H C (North'mb Tyneside
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft
Smith, Jas. Parker (Lanarks.)
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Macdona, John Cumming
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Cox, Irwin Edward B.
Maconochie, A. W.
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Cranborne, Viscount
M'Calmont, Col. H L B (Cambs.)
Stroyan, John
Cripps, Charles Alfred
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire
Strutt, Hon. Charles Hedley
Crossley, Sir Savile
Majendie, James A. H.
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Martin, Richard Buddulph
Thornton, Percy M.
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Tollemache, Henry James
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Tufnell, Lt.-Col. Edward
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Valentia, Viscount
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Moor, Robt. Jasper (Shropehire)
Walker, Col. William Hall
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edw.
Morrell, George Herbert
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Webb, Col. William George
Finch, George H.
Morrison, James Archibald
Welby, Sir Chas. G. E. (Notts
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Fisher, William Hayes
Murray, Rt Hn A Graham (Bute
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u-Lyne
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Flower, Ernest
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Wills, Sir Frederick
Garfit, William
Myers, William Henry
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Gordon, Hn J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Gore, Hn. GRCOrmsby- (Salop)
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Wynhham, Rt. Hon. George
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Parker, Gilbert
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Pemberton, John S. G.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Penn, John
Gretton, John
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
MR. A. J. BALFOUR rose in his place, and claimed to move, "That the Original Question be now put."
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Crossley, Sir Savile
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Cantley, Henry Strother
Dewar, T. R. (T'rH'mlets S. Geo.
Allhusen, Augustus Hy. Eden
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbysh.
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Balcarres, Lord
Chamberlain, J. Austen (W'rc'r
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Balfour, Rt Hn. A. J. (Manch'r
Chapman, Edward
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Charrington, Spencer
Fellowes, Hn. Ailwyn Edward
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Banbury, Frederick George
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Finch, George H.
Bathurst, Hon. Allen B.
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Finlay, Sir Robt. Bannatyne
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Fisher, William Hayes
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Fitzroy, Hon. Edw. Algernon
Bigwood, James
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Middles'x)
Corbett, A. C. (Glasgow)
Flower, Ernest
Brookfield, Col. Montagu
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Garfit, William
Bull, William James
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Godson, Sir Augustus Fred.
Bullard, Sir Harry
Cranborne, Viscount
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Butcher, John George
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Gore, Hn G. R. C. Ormsby- (Salop
Original Question put accordingly.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 168; Noes, 93. (Division List No. 223.)
Gorst, Rt. Hn. Sir John Eldon
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire)
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Majendie, James A. H.
Round, James
Green, W. D. (Wednesbury)
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Royds, Clement Molyneux
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Russell, T. W.
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Rutherford, John
Gretton, John
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Moon, Edward Robert Pacy
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Hamilton, Rt Hn. Ld G. (Midd'x
More, Robt. Jasper (Shropsh.
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Hamilton, Marq of (L'nd'nd'ry
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow)
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Hanbury, Rt Hon. Robert W.
Morrell, George Herbert
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd.
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Smith, H C (North'mb Tyneside
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Morrison, James Archibald
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Spear, John Ward
Helder, Augustus
Murray, Rt. Hn. A. G. (Bute)
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Henderson, Alexander
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Hermon-Hodge, Robert T.
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath
Stroyan, John
Hobhouse, H. (Somerset, E.)
Myers, William Henry
Strutt, Hon. Charles Hedley
Hogg, Lindsay
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Hope, J. F. (Sh'ff'd, Brightside)
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Thornton, Percy M.
Hutton, John (Yorks., N. R.)
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Tollemache, Henry James
Jessel, Capt. Herb. Merton
Parker, Gilbert
Tufnell, Lt.-Col. Edward
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Pemberton, John S. G.
Valentia, Viscount
Kennaway, Rt. Hn. Sir J. H.
Penn, John
Walker, Col. William Hall
Keswick, William
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney)
Knowles, Lees
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Webb, Col. William George
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth
Pretyman, Ernest George
Welby, Sir Chas. G. E. (Notts.)
Lawson, John Grant
Purvis, Robert
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Lee, Arthur H (Hants, Fareham
Pym, C. Guy
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Randles, John S.
Whitmore, Chas. Algernon
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Reid, James (Greenock)
Wills, Sir Frederick
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Long, Col. Charles W (Evesham
Rentoul, James Alexander
Wilson-Todd. Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.
Renwick, George
Wodehouse, Rt Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Macdona, John Cumming
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Maconochie, A. W.
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
M'Calmont, Col. H. B. L. (Cambs
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Mara, James
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
O'Shaugnessy, P. J.
Ambrose, Robert
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur D.
Partington, Oswald
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Boland, John
Holland, William Henry
Priestley, Arthur
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Horniman, Frederick John
Rea, Russel
Boyle, James
Jacoby, James Alfred
Reddy, M.
Brand, Hon. Arthur G.
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
Rickett, J. Compton
Brigg, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
Roberts, John H. (Denbigh.)
Burke, E. Haviland-
Leamy, Edmund
Schwann, Charles E.
Burt, Thomas
Leese, Sir J. F. (Accrington)
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Caldwell, James
Leng, Sir John
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Lewis, John Herbert
Sinclair, Capt John (Forfarshire
Channing, Francis Allston
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C R (Northants
Colville, John
M'Dermott, Patrick
Sullivan, Donal
Craig, Robert Hunter
M'Killop, W. (Sligo, North)
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Crean, Eugene
Markham, Arthur Basil
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
Mooney, John J.
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Delany, William
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.)
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Weir, James Galloway
Dillon, John
Moss, Samuel
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Donelan, Captain A.
Murphy, John
Whiteley, George (York, W. R.
Doogan, P. C.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Dnffy, William J.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Norman, Henry
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
Fenwick, Charles
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'd
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Yoxall, James Henry
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Wallace and Mr. Lambert.
Fuller, J. M. F.
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Gilhooly, James
O'Connor, T. P. (Liverpool)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Harwood, George
O'Malley, William
3. Motion made, and Question proposed, "That a sum, not exceeding £;571,085, be granted to His Majesty, to complete the sum necessary to defray the Charge which will come in course of payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902, for the Expenses of the Post Office Packet Service."
*MR. WEIR said that under Item A there was a sum of £;3,000 for the packet service to Stornoway. The boat was forty years old, and carried His Majesty's mails through stormy seas at a speed not exceeding, at the best of times, ten knots an hour, and was seventy times late in three months. The experiment was commenced on April 1st, and he wished to know how long it was to continue before the Post Office asked for tenders for another steamer. Would the hon. Gentleman give an assurance that tenders would be invited for a swifter steamer? If the hon. Gentleman's predecessor had been in office he believed a better steamer would have been provided. But unfortunately the Duke of Norfolk was not Postmaster General, and the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Preston did not represent the Post Office in the House of Commons. He had stated that the matter would be carefully considered, and if he had continued to represent the Post Office a better service would now be un fait accompli. But of course the hon. Gentleman was yet young at his business, he was not seasoned, and he had not the experience of the right hon. Gentleman who preceded him.
He hoped, however, the hon. Gentleman would give him an assurance that the service would be improved, and that it was not the intention of the Post Office to continue to employ the "Clydesdale" for this service. The Island of Lewis had a population of 30,000, and Stornoway was one of the finest naval reserve stations in the kingdom. The Island deserved better consideration from His Majesty's Government. The forty-year-old tub might go down one day, and he hoped the hon. Gentleman would not then be on board, or even the hon. Member for Peckham who spoke of the people in the Highlands as uncivilised. Would the hon. Gentleman follow in the steps of his predecessor, who promised a better
boat? The railway had now been carried up to Mallaig, but what was the use of this if the western seaboard and the islands were not to be developed? He hoped he would not be met with the miserable plea that the Stornoway mail service did not pay. The Post Office made a profit of nearly four millions a year, and surely the Treasury could afford to be more liberal. The Government gave large subsidies to steamers carrying mails to foreign countries and the colonies; they really ought to look after the needs of the people at home. In case he did not get a favourable reply he would safeguard himself by moving the reduction of the Vote by £;100.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Item A be reduced by £;100, in respect of the Contract for the Conveyance of Mails between Kyle and Stornoway.";(Mr. Weir.)
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN said that the subject had been already mentioned in the course of the discussion, but he would repeat briefly the facts of the case. The service no doubt was not a very fast one, and he could easily imagine a much better one. He hoped, however, that in some respects the mails to Stornoway would be accelerated in the course of the summer. He thought that the railway company were contemplating an acceleration of the trains during the tourist season, which would enable the mails to be delivered more rapidly. The hon. Member asked that the Post Office should give up the present contract, and invite tenders for a new service of sixteen, eighteen, or twenty knots;the hon. Member placed no limit to his ambition. The hon. Member complained that the present boat was forty years old, but he was told she was still a good, seaworthy vessel. If his memory did not mislead him, the "Victory" was forty years old when Nelson selected her for his flagship.
*MR. WEIR: She was not a steamship.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN said he was perfectly well aware of that. What were the facts of the case? The service was already run at a very considerable loss. The subsidy for the packet was £;3,000 a year, and the cost of the whole service to Stornoway was
£;4,270, and the revenue it brought in was only £;1,258. Under those circumstances it could not be said that the Post Office was dealing ungenerously with Stornoway. He himself would only be too glad to call for tenders for a new service if it could be done without further expense to the taxpayers, but he would not be justified in incurring increased expenditure, seeing how largely the present expenditure exceeded the revenue. After all, in such matters they should look to the country as a whole. Other districts had to be considered, and the debate afforded a sufficient indication as to how numerous were the claims on the Post Office.
*MR. WEIR said he was really sorry the hon. Gentleman had not given him a more satisfactory reply. He was sure he would have received much more encouragement from the hon. Gentleman's predecessor.
AYES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Ambrose, Robert
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir A. D.
O'Malley, William
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
O'Mara, James
Boland, John
Holland, William Henry
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Horniman, Frederick John
Partington, Oswald
Boyle, James
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Pirie, Duncan V.
Brigg, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
Power, Patrick Joseph
Burke, E. Haviland-
Lambert, George
Priestley, Arthur
Caldwell, James
Leamy, Edmund
Rea, Russell
Cameron, Robert
Leese, Sir Jos. F. (Accrington)
Reddy, M.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Leng, Sir John
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Causton, Richard Knight
Lewis, John Herbert
Schwann, Charles E.
Channing, Francis Allston
Lough, Thomas
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Colville, John
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Craig, Robert Hunter
M'Dermott, Patrick
Sinclair, Capt. John (Forfarsh.)
Crean, Eugene
Markham, Arthur Basil
Spencer, Rt Hn C. R. (Northants
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
Mooney, John J.
Sullivan, Donal
Delany, William
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Dillon, John
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Donelan, Captain A.
Moss, Samuel
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Doogan, P. C.
Murphy, John
Wallace, Robert
Duffy, William J.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Warner, Thos. Courtenay T.
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Norman, Henry
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Flynn, James Christopher
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Fuller, J. M. F.
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr. Weir and Mr. John Dewar.
Gladstone, Rt. Hn. Herbert J.
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Connor, T. P. (Liverpool)
NOES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Beach, Rt Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbysh.)
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manon)
Allhnsen, Augustus Henry E.
Bigwood, James
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Bond, Edward
Chamberlain, J. A. (Worc'r)
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Middlesex)
Chapman, Edward
Balcarres, Lord
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Charrington, Spencer
Balfour, Rt. Hn. A. J. (Manc'r
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Bull, William James
Cochrane, Hon. T. H. A. E.
Balfour, Maj. K. R. (Christch.)
Butcher, John George
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Banbury, Frederick George
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Bathurst, Hon. Allen B.
Cautley, Henry Strother
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
The hon. Gentleman had made a mistake of 25 per cent. He said that the cost of the service was £;4,270, whereas it only appeared in the Vote as £;3,000.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN said that the whole cost was £;4,270. The £;3,000 included in the Vote was for the packet service only.
*MR. WEIR said he was dealing with the packet service, the subject before the Committee. The hon. Gentleman had referred to the acceleration of the mails on land. What he wanted was the acceleration of the mails on water. The hon. Gentleman had given him no encouragement as regarded a better service, and he regretted extremely being obliged to go to a division.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 86; Noes, 166. (Division List No. 224.)
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Hutton, John (Yorks, N. R.)
Reid, James (Greenock)
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Rentoul, James Alexander
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H.
Renwick, George
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Keswick, William
Rickett, J. Compton
Cranborne, Viscount
Knowles, Lees
Ridley, Hon. M. W. (Stalyb'dge)
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Crossley, Sir Savile
Lawson, John Grant
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Dewar, TR. (T'rH'ml'ts, S. Geo.
Lee, Arthur H (Hants, Fareham
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Ropner, Col. Robert
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Bound, James
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Long, Col. C. W. (Evesham)
Rutherford, John
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol S.
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Fellowes, Hn. Ailwyn Edward
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Finch, George H.
Macdona, John Cumming
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Maconochie, A. W.
Smith, H C (North'mb. Tyn's'de
Fisher, William Hayes
M 'Calmont, Col. H L B (Cambs.
Smith, James P. (Lanarks.)
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Majendie, James A. H.
Spear, John Ward
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Garfit, William
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Godson, Sir Augustus Fredk.
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Stroyan, John
Gordon, Hn. J E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Moon, Edward Robert Pacy
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Gore, Hn G R. C Ormsby- (Salop)
More, Robt. Jasper (Shropshire
Thornton, Percy M.
Gore, Hn. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.)
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow)
Tollemache, Henry James
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Morrell, George Herbert
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Valentia, Viscount
Green, Walford D. (Wednesb'ry
Morrison, James Archibald
Walker, Col. William Hall
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nd's
Morton, Arthur H A. (Deptford
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney)
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Webb, Col. William George
Gretton, John
Murray, Rt Hn A Graham (Bute
Welby, Lt.-Cl. A. C. E. (Taunt'n
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Welby, Sir Charles G. E (Notts.)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Wentworth, B. C. Vernon-
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Myers, William Henry
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne)
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G (Middx
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Hamilton, Marq. of (L'nd'derry
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Wills, Sir Frederick
Hanbury, Rt. Hn. Robt. Wm.
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd
Parker, Gilbert
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Pemberton, John S. G.
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Penn, John
Wortley, Rt. Hn. C. B. Stuart-
Heaton, John Henniker
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Helder, Augustus
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Pretyman, Ernest George
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Hobhouse, Henry (Somerset, E.
Purvis, Robert
Hogg, Lindsay
Pym, C. Guy
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield Brightside
Randles, John S.
Original Question again proposed.
MR. DILLON (Mayo, E.) said he desired some information on a question which had been brought before the Committee year after year on this Vote, namely, the question of the lascars serving on board P. and O. steamers. He had always thought that the history of the question was one of the most extraordinary ever brought before the House of Commons. Year after year his friend Mr. Havelock Wilson, who was for many years Member for Middlesbrough, had brought forward the question of the defiance of the law by the P. and O. Company, who were subsidised by the House of Commons, and although for one or two sessions the Government attempted to evade the contention that the P. and O. Company did defy the law, yet by admirable perseverance Mr. Wilson at last compelled
the present Home Secretary, who was then President of the Board of Trade, to admit that the P. and O. Company had openly and persistently defied the law, and that, in spite of continued warnings, they still declined to give the lascars in their employment that amount of cubic space accommodation which the law required. The matter had been before the House year after year, and as far as he could recollect, when it was last debated, the Home Secretary stated that it was still under discussion with the P. and O. Company, and the right hon. Gentleman led the Committee to believe that the P. and O. Company would be called upon to obey the law. What he wanted to know was whether the P. and O. Company had yet agreed to provide for their lascar seamen that accommodation which every other company carrying mails and subsidised by
Parliament was compelled, by the law of the land, to give. In a previous debate the chairman of the P. and O. Company took refuge behind some Indian regulations, but it was proved to the satisfaction of the Committee that that did not cover the ease, and that P. and O. boats sailing from England were bound by the regulations of the English Board of Trade. The pretext was put forward on behalf of the P. and O. Company that it was impossible for them to work their ships with white labour, and that it was absolutely essential for them to employ lascars in going through the tropics.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: May I interrupt the hon. Member? There is an action by the Board of Trade against this company now pending, and while it is pending it is impossible for me to discuss the hearing of the law.
MR. DILLON said it was very satisfactory after all these years to have got so far, but he should like to hear from the President of the Board of Trade when the action was commenced and how soon it would be heard.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF TRADE (Mr. GERALD BALFOUR, Leeds, Central): That entirely depends on the courts.
MR. DILLON said it did not depend on the courts when the action was commenced.
MR. GERALD BALFOUR: This is an agreed action between the Board of. Trade and the P. and O. Company as to whether the law has been infringed. It was commenced about six months ago, but I cannot determine when it will be heard.
MR. DILLON said he confessed that that explanation was exceedingly unsatisfactory. Let him recall the history of the matter. It was four or five years ago since in his own hearing the then hon. Member for Middlesbrough asserted from his own knowledge;and he spoke for the seamen of the country that that great and powerful company were breaking the law. He was contradicted flatly by the representative of
the Board of Trade and challenged to produce cases. He did produce cases;specific instances;and then after a controversy extending over, he thought, two years, his hon. friend compelled the President of the Board of Trade to admit that the company were breaking the law.
MR. GERALD BALFOUR: It is doubtful whether this matter is under Indian law or English law, and it is really to decide that that this action has been taken. I cannot explain at the moment the precise form the action takes, but it is an action which has been agreed upon to decide whether the P. and O. Company are under Indian law or English law.
MR. DILLON said he must persist in his statement that, so far as they had been able to get information from the Board of Trade, it was entirely unsatisfactory. It was two years since he heard the President of the Board of Trade, state that the law had been broken, and that immediate steps would be taken to enforce it. Now they were told that some agreement of a technical and abstract character had been come to between the Board of Trade and the P. and O. Company to determine whether the law had been broken. Was that the way the Board of Trade proceeded, against persons who had broken the law? Was that the usual procedure? If was not the usual procedure. If it were brought to the knowledge of the Board of Trade that the law had been broken, they did not enter into an agreement with the person breaking the law to have an action such as had been described. The right hon. Gentleman did not even remember the character of the action or when it was likely to be brought to trial. The whole history of the matter was of the most suspicious and extraordinary character. He did not believe that any other body of men less powerful, less influential, and less wealthy than the P. and O. Company could have for such a number of years continued to defy the law. In previous debates the plea was put forward on behalf of the company, in order to justify their conduct in breaking the law, that they were compelled to employ lascars;that they were necessary for the work. But
the Orient Company, which went over the same route, employed white labour, and the reason why the P. and O. Company employed black labour was because it was cheaper, because the keep of the lascars did not cost a third of the keep of white men, because they received very small wages, and were crowded into wretched accommodation. That was why the lascars were employed. The P. and O. Company found it to their interest to boycott white labour, They had heard about the necessity of encouraging the mercantile marine and British seamen, who were being almost wiped off the face of the waters, and yet a great company, enjoying a subsidy of £;300,000 a year from Parliament, were the greatest enemies of British seamen, by employing an enormous quantity of cheap Asiatic labour. If they insisted in employing Asiatic labour to the exclusion of white labour, which other companies employed over the same seas, they ought to be compelled to apply the same sanitary laws and give the same accommodation. It was monstrous that such a state of things should be tolerated for a single hour. As they were called upon to vote a subsidy to the company, the Committee had a right to put pressure on the Board of Trade to put an end to breaches of the law. In order to give the Committee an opportunity of expressing an opinion on the matter he moved to reduce the Vote by £;50,000 in respect of this item.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Item E be reduced by £;100, in respect of the Contract for the Conveyance of Mails to Asia and Australia.";(Mr. Dillon.)
*MR. HENNIKER HEATON (Canterbury) said that, before referring to the matter raised by the hon. Member, he might be permitted to make one observation as to the extraordinary way the debate had been conducted, by which they were unable to discuss the question of the Postmaster General not being in the House of Commons.
*THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member must now confine himself to the subject matter of the debate.
*MR. HENNIKER HEATON said he had asked permission to make that statement,
and would now proceed to discuss the Vote. His complaint was that the Packet Vote should not be charged to the Post Office at all. Up to 1868 it was charged to the Admiralty, and a very large proportion of it was not for Post Office purposes at all. There was one item which he strongly objected to, and that was the sum of £;60,000 for the mail service between Vancouver and Hong Kong. He objected to that sum being placed on the Post Office Vote. The mails from Vancouver to Hong Kong;
*THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Member is anticipating. He is now discussing the next item;Item F. He must confine himself to Item E.
*MR. HENNIKER HEATON said that Item E deserved the consideration of the Committee, because the whole of the subsidies should not be charged to the Post Office. The service to Australia was quite unworthy of the country. A Return issued by the Postmaster General of Victoria showed that the P. and O. boats were always from two to four days later than the French boats carrying mails between England and Australia. Yet it is only fair to say that the P. and O. boats delivered the mails before their contract time. The absence of the Postmaster General from the House of Commons and the utter inability of his hon. friend to explain the Vote were a sufficient condemnation of the way it was brought before the Committee. The whole explanation of the P. and O. service to Australia was that the small subsidy paid to the company for years prevented any other company from competing. While he had the greatest respect for the P. and O. Company, and for the splendid officers and men they employed, apart from black labour, he thought it was a great wrong to the country that the Post Office authorities never called for tenders for carrying mails to Australia until six months before expiration of the contracts, which made it impossible for any other company to compete, because it required years to make preparations in order to tender for such a great service to be performed in quicker time. He felt he was not able to go into the general question of the packet services,
but he should point out as each item came forward the most astounding anomalies, which would not be tolerated for a day if the Post Office was conducted on businesslike lines.
CAPTAIN NORTON said that, like his hon. friend the Member for East Mayo, he too remembered the late Member for Middlesbrough moving in the matter of the lascars employed by the P. and O. Company. He recollected, if he was not mistaken, that it had been held that ships leaving British ports were bound to carry out the Board of Trade regulations. Perhaps the Attorney General would state if ships leaving British ports and flying the British flag, whether they carried British or foreign or coloured seamen, were not bound to conform to the Board of Trade regulations? The question was raised whether the lascars, being shipped at Bombay, should only receive the accommodation laid down for Eastern seamen, but the late hon. Member for Middlesbrough proved beyond doubt that, whether the lascars were shipped at Bombay or any other port in the East, so far as outward voyages from England were concerned, the regulations of the Board of Trade were broken. Now, after two years, the Committee was told that some friendly action was pending between the Board of Trade and the P. and O. Company to try and establish some modus vivendi by which the company might bring themselves within the four corners of the law. The President of the Board of Trade dissented. What, then, was the object of this lawsuit? He asked whether or not all sailors, whether coloured or European, sailing under the British flag from British ports, were entitled to the same amount of cubic space for sleeping and eating purposes.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Sir ROBERT FINLAY, Inverness Burghs): The proceedings which have been referred to are for the purpose of having it determined whether or not the Board of Trade regulations apply in the case of the P. and O. Company in regard to the employment of lascars. The P. and O. Company have contended they are subject to Indian Acts, which are different in effect, and that the regulations with regard to British seamen
do not apply. These proceedings are not friendly proceedings with a view to a compromise of any sort or kind; they are proceedings in which both parties are actuated by a strong desire to have the point settled once for all as to what the law on the subject is. As regards the date at which the proceedings will come to hearing, I think it is fixed for the 18th of this month;at all events, it is some early date. The proceedings are these:;The P. and O. Company have brought a Petition of Right on the ground that the disallowance of space with reference to the employment of lascars on their boats is illegal. A question of law may arise with regard to the form of the proceedings, but it is hoped that the law as to the provision of space for lascars will be determined.
CAPTAIN NORTON complained that more than four years had elapsed since this matter was brought before the House, but the Government were still allowing British seamen to be squeezed out of British subsidised ships by lascars. It would be said that lascars were British subjects, but they were not men upon whom the country could depend to fight its ships in case of war. The great difficulty at the present moment was to get men for the Navy. Something like 30,000 men were required for mobilisation, and whereas the Government on the 4th March last established a system of Royal Naval Reserves in order that they might have a reserve of British seamen to man their ships, they had only been able to get 800 men up to the present in all the ports of the United Kingdom. The Navy was being starved because the merchant service was starved. The conduct of the Government upon this subject had not been at all straightforward for a patriotic Government. They were subsidising this company and enabling it to make money as against other patriotic shipowners who employed British labour, and as a protest he should certainly support the Amendment.
MR. J. WILSON (Glasgow, St. Rollox) thought the hon. Member had got a good deal out of his depth. He was not at all correct in stating that the P. and O. Company was the only company which employed lascars.
CAPTAIN NORTON: I did not make any such statement.
MR. J. WILSON pointed out that nearly all the companies employed lascars as firemen, and it was a good thing they did, as lascars were much better fitted for that work than Europeans.
CAPTAIN NORTON said that the P. and O. Company did not by any means confine their employment of lascars to the work of firemen.
MR. COURTENAY WARNER (Staffordshire, Lichfield) said that whether or not the P. and O. Company employed lascars was not the point under discussion. The question before the Committee was whether this company was to receive this subsidy if it did not comply with the Board of Trade regulations. It did not matter in the least whether the company were entitled legally to run ships to India and back with or without this accommodation. It was all very well to say there was an action pending. The point was not what the law could compel the company to do, but what the House could compel them to do by this subsidy, and his contention was that the subsidy should not be given to a company which did not provide proper accommodation for the, crew, By giving this subsidy for carrying the mails the Government were really subsidising the English merchant navy, and in return for such a large subsidy there should be a proper carrying out of the Board of Trade regulations.
MR. T. P. O'CONNOR (Liverpool, Scotland) had a distinct recollection that on the last occasion when this matter was discussed the present Home Secretary emphatically declared that in his opinion the P. and O. Company were violating the law, and that if they continued to do so it would be the duty of the Board of Trade to take notice of the matter. All that his valorous words had come to, however, was that there was to be a more or less friendly action between the Government and the P. and O. Company;an action too, started by the company. What the Committee had expected was that the Board of Trade would take action.
MR. GERALD BALFOUR: It is true the action is started by the P. and O. Company, but it is in consequence of the action taken by the Board of Trade. The Board of Trade has disallowed the cubic space, and the P. and O. Company have brought an action called a "Petition of Right" against that disallowance, and upon that Petition of Right will be decided whether the company are entitled to engage their lascars upon the Indian regulations.
MR. T. P. O'CONNOR admitted that that was a satisfactory answer to that particular point. But even supposing it was decided that the company were entitled under Indian law to give the lascars less cubic space than they would have to give to English sailors under the English law, that did not really affect the attitude this Committee ought to adopt, This was a Vote of £;300,000 of British money to this particular company. Had not the Committee a right to ask that the company which received this large sum of money should give proper protection to the health and life not only of the lascars, but also of the rest of the crew and the passengers on the vessels, whose lives and safety indirectly depended upon the lives and safety of the lascars? Was it really consistent with the policy of a great naval country that they should encourage the exclusion of British seamen from one of the great subsidised services by permitting worse accommodation to be given to lascars than would be allowed to British sailors? That was a question the Government had not met, and the Committee were entitled to an assurance that, whatever the decision of the courts might be, fair treatment would be demanded for every sailor, of whatever nationality he might be.
MR. DILLON said that the all important question was whether at the present moment the company were allowing the regulation space to the lascars, or whether, in spite of the disallowance of the Board of Trade, they persisted in their violation of the rule. He gathered from the silence of the President of the Board of Trade that the company were persisting in their violation of the rule. If that was the case it was a monstrous position of affairs. After all the years which had
elapsed since the matter was first brought forward, the Board of Trade had called upon the company to obey the law and the company simply presented a Petition of Right, but continued to defy the Board. Even if the Petition of Bight succeeded, it would not substantially alter the merits of the question. A great British line subsidised by the Government should not be allowed to obtain a premium and an advantage over other lines by the exclusion of British labour from its ships. Nobody had proposed that all subsidised lines should be compelled to employ only British labour, although he thought that would not be an unreasonable demand. All that was proposed was that they should be placed under the same regulations with regard to their Asiatic labour as they would be with regard to British labour. But the main strength of the case was that for three years this company had set at defiance the regulations to which every other shipper in the country had to conform, and that no explanation had been given to the House of the deplorable delay which had been tolerated before action was taken.
*THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT (Mr. RITCHIE, Croydon): The hon. Gentleman opposite has said quite truly that when I had to speak as President of the Board of Trade upon this subject I expressed my own opinion, which was based upon that given me by the law officers of the Crown, that the P. and O. Company were not conforming to the law. In consequence the Board of Trade disallowed the space occupied by the lascar crews whenever the required space was not given. The effect of that, of course, was that the P. and O. Company were compelled to pay much larger dues wherever the ships went than they otherwise would have done. The Board of Trade, therefore, did give effect to the legal advice that they received. That course has never been altered, and, notwithstanding this action which is pending, I understand that the practice is still being followed. The practice of disallowing space has been in operation some time now, and it still continues. The P. and O. Company are, therefore, being penalised on every ship which carries lascar labour out of this country where sufficient space is not
allowed. Whether the view of the Board of Trade or the view of the P. and O. Company that they are not under the English law is the correct one will be decided by the courts, but in the meantime, as has always been the case, the crew space is being disallowed in consequence of the belief of the Board of Trade that the P. and O. Company are not acting in accordance with their obligations.
MR. DILLON: But do the P. and O. Company still persist in their course?
*MR. RITCHIE: Yes, and their crew space is still being disallowed.
MR. DILLON said that that disallowance had been going on for the last four or five years. Why did the company continue to defy the law? Because it paid them to do so, as they made more money by refusing to comply with the regulations. The Government were subsidising a company which for four years had set a pretty example to other shipowners of how to defy successfully the Board of Trade and the opinions of the law officers of the Crown. He should certainly take a division on the subject.
MR. E. J. C. MORTON thought the Government were taking up an extraordinary attitude with regard to this question. The P. and O. Company had been penalised for four years, and were still continuing in their course. The obvious inference was that it paid them to do so. The object of inflicting a fine, which was in the nature of a criminal punishment, was not to get the fine, but to stop the crime. But this crime still went on, and the perpetrator of the crime found that it paid to pay the fine and continue the crime. Seeing that the fine did not put a stop to the crime, the Government would have to take some other course, and certainly the last thing they should do was to continue to subsidise the criminal. The obvious duty of the Government was to stop subsidising this particular line as long as it refused; to comply with the regulations. On this ground he thought it was the duty of everyone to support the reduction of the Vote.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: I desire to say only one word, which I think is necessitated by the last two
speeches we have heard. I do not propose to go into the question of the Board of Trade regulations, or to express an opinion as to the point of law which is before the courts. I desire only to point out that the suggestion that as long as the P. and O. Company refuse to accept the view of the Board of Trade of their obligations we should stop this subsidy is one which cannot be carried out. The subsidy is payable under a contract for a term of years, which has not yet expired. When that term does expire the question may be considered, but until it does expire we cannot do anything with regard to the subsidy.
MR. COURTENAY WARNER: When does it expire?
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: I cannot give the exact figure, but I believe it is in between three and six years from the present time.
MR. COURTENAY WARNER: Does that apply to all the subsidies paid to the P. and O. Company?
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: Yes.
MR. JOHN BURNS asked whether while the case was pending the company
AYES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.)
Hayden, John Patrick
Partington, Oswald
Ambrose, Robert
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Chas. Seale-
Pirie, Duncan V.
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Horniman, Frederick John
Priestley, Arthur
Boland, John
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
Rea, Russell
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Kennedy, Patrick James
Reddy, M.
Boyle, James
Lambert, George
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Brigg, John
Leamy, Edmund
Schwann, Charles E.
Burke, E. Haviland-
Leng, Sir John
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Burns, John
Lough, Thomas
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Caldwell, James
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Sinclair, Capt. John (Forfarsh.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
M'Dermott, Patrick
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C R (Northants
Channing, Francis Allston
Mooney, John J.
Sullivan, Donal
Colville, John
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Craig, Robert Hunter
Morton, E. J. C. (Devonport)
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.
Crean, Eugene
Moss, Samuel
Wallace, Robert
Delany, William
Murphy, J.
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Donelan, Captain A.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Weir, James Galloway
Doogan, P. C.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Duffy, William J.
Norman, Henry
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Connor, Jas. (Wicklow, W.
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
O'Connor, T. P. (Liverpool)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr. Dillon and Captain Norton.
Fuller, J. M. F.
O'Malley, William
Gilhooly, James
O'Mara, James
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
NOES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Balfour, Maj. K R (Christchurch
Allhuhen, Augustus Henry E.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Banbury, Frederick George
were to give their lascars the space insisted upon by the Board of Trade regulations, or whether they were to be allowed to continue to put five lascars where only three British sailors could be put.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: Whatever my inclinations might be, I have no power to insist that the P. and O. Company should do what the hon. Member desires.
*MR. WEIR said this was a very old story. The Committee were always being told that a case was pending. The case might go on for years, as they all knew how lawyers could arrange matters so that proceedings were postponed from time to time. It was very unsatisfactory that the Secretary to the Treasury should not be able to inform the Committee how long this contract had to run, especially as it involved so large an expenditure as a quarter of a million of money a year. With regard to the manning of the ships, any number of splendid men could be obtained in the Highlands of Scotland.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 76; Noes, 153. (Division List No. 225.)
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Hamilton, Rt Hn L'rd G (Midd'x
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Hamilton, Marq of (L'nd'nderry
Pretyman, Ernest George
Bigwood, James
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Purvis, Robert
Bond, Edward
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd
Randles, John S.
Brassey, Albert
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Reid, James (Greenock)
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Remnant, James Farquharson
Bull, William James
Helder, Augustus
Renwick, George
Butcher, John George
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Hobhouse, Henry (Somerset, E.
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hogg, Lindsay
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Hope, J F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Hutton, John (Yorks, N. R.)
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.)
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H.
Round, James
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Keswick, William
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Charrington, Spencer
Knowles, Lees
Seton-Karr, Henry
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth)
Sharps, William Edward T.
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Lawson, John Grant
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Lee, Arthur H (Hants, Fareham
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Smith, H C (N'rth'mb. Tyneside
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Spear, John Ward
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Long, Col. Chas. W. (Evesham)
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Cranborne, Viscount
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Stroyan, John
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Thornton, Percy M.
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Macdona, John Cumming
Tollemache, Henry James
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Maconochie, A. W.
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Fellowes, Hn. Ailwyn Edward
M'Calmont, Col. H. L. B. (Cam.
Valentia, Viscount
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Majendie, James A. H.
Vincent, Col. Sir C E H (Sheffield
Finch, George H.
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Vincent, Sir Edgar (Exeter)
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Walker Col. William Hall
Ffsher, William Hayes
Milton, Viscount
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Fitzroy, Hn. Edward Algernon
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Webb, Col. William George
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
More, Robert J. (Shropshire)
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E (Taunton
Garfit, William
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow)
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts.)
Godson, Sir Augustus Fredk.
Morrell, George Herbert
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Gordon, Hn. J. E (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Whiteley, H. (Asht'n-un.-Lyne
Gore, Hn. G. R C Ormsby- (Salop
Morrison, James Archibald
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Gore, Hn. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.)
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Wills, Sir Frederick
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Green, Walford D (Wednesb'ry)
Myers, William Henry
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Wortley, Rt. Hn. C. B. Stuart-
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Gretton, John
Parker, Gilbert
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Pemberton, John S. G.
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Penn, John
Original Question again proposed.
It being after Midnight, and objection being taken to Further Proceeding, the Chairman proceeded to interrupt the Business:;
MR. A. J. BALFOUR rose in his place,
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Bond, Edward
Charrington, Spencer
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Brassey, Albert
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Allhusen, Augustus Hy. Eden
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Atkinson, Rt. Hn. John
Hull, William James
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Butcher, John George
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Cautley, Henry Strother
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Banbury, Frederick George
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Cranborne, Viscount
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Chamberlain, Rt Hon. J. (Birm.
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Bigwood, James
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Dorington, Sir John Edward
and claimed to move, "That the Question be now put."
Question put, "That the Question be now put."
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 150; Noes, 68. (Division List No. 226.)
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Lee, Arthur H (Hants, Fareham
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Fellowes, Hn. Ailwyn Edward
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Long, Col. C. W. (Evesham)
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Finch, George H.
Long, Rt Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.
Round, James
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Fisher, William Hayes
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Seton-Karr, Henry
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Lucas, Col. F. (Lowestoft)
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Garfit, William
Macdona, John Cumming
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew
Godson, Sir Augustus Fredk.
Maconochie, A. W.
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
M'Calmont, Col. H. L. B (Cambs
Smith, H C (North'mb. Tynes
Gore, Hn. G. R. C Ormsby (Salop
Majendie, James A. H.
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks
Gore, Hn. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc)
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Spear, John Ward
Gorst, Rt. Hn. Sir J. Eldon
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Milton, Viscount
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Green, Walford D (Wednesbury
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Stroyan, John
Greene, Sir E W Bry'S Edm'nds
More, Robt. Jasper (Shropshire)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Morgan, David J. (Walthams'w
Thornton, Percy M.
Gretton, John
Morrell, Goorge Herbert
Tollemache, Henry James
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Morrison, James Archibald
Valentia, Viscount
Hamilton, Rt. Hn. Lord G (Midx
Morton, Arthur H. A (Deptford)
Vincent, Col. Sir C E H (Sheffield
Hamilton, Marq. of (L'donderry
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Vincent, Sir Edgar (Exeter)
Hanbury, Rt Hon. Robt. Wm.
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Walker, Col. William Hall
Hardy, L. (Kent, Ashford)
Myers, William Henry
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Webb, Colonel William George
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E (Taunton
Heaton, John Henniker
Parker, Gilbert
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts.
Helder, Augustus
Pemberton, John S. G.
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Penn, John
Whiteley, H. (Asht'nuud Lyne
Hobhouse, Henry (Somerset, E.
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Wills, Sir Frederick
Hogg, Lindsay
Pretyman, Ernest George
Wilson John (Glasgow)
Hope, J. F. (Sheffi'd, Brightside)
Purvis, Robert
Wilson- Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Randles, John S.
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir J. H.
Reid, James (Greenock)
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Keswick, William
Remnant, James Farquharson
Knowles, Lees
Renwick, George
TELLERS FOR THE AYES.;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Lawrence, Joseph Monmouth
Ridley, Hon. M. W (Stalybridge
Lawson, John Grant
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Connor, T. P. (Liverpool)
Ambrose, Robert
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Malley, William
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Scale-
O'Mara, James
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Boland, John
Horniman, Frederick John
Partington, Oswald
Boyle, James
Jones, William (Carnarvons.)
Pirie, Duncan V.
Brigg, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
Power, Patrick Joseph
Burke, E. Haviland-
Lambert, George
Priestley, Arthur
Burns, John
Leamy, Edmund
Rea, Russell
Caldwell, James
Leng, Sir John
Reddy, M.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Lough, Thomas
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Channing, Francis Allston
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Colville, John
M'Dermott, Patrick
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Craig, Robert Hunter
Mooney, John J.
Sullivan, Donal
Crean, Eugene
Morton, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Delany, William
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Dillon, John
Moss, Samuel
Weir, James Galloway
Donelan, Captain A.
Murphy, John
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Duffy, William J.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Whiteley, J. H. (Halifax)
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Norman, Henry
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Warner and Captain Norton.
Fuller, J. M. F.
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Gilhooly, James
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Question put accordingly.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 148; Noes, 68. (Division List No. 227.)
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Green, Walford D (Wednesbury
Pemberton, John S. G.
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Penn, John
Allhusen, Augustus Hy. Eden
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Gretton, John
Pretyman, Ernest George
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Purvis, Robert
Balfour, Rt Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Randles, John S.
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G. (Mid'x
Reid, James (Greenock)
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Hamilton, Marq of (L'nd'nderry
Remnant, James Farquharson
Banbury, Frederick George
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Renwick, George
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'rd
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybr'dge)
Beach, Rt Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Ridley, S. F. (Bethnal Green)
Bigwood, James
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Bond, Edward
Helder, Augustus.
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Brassey, Albert
Hermon-Hodge, Robert Trotter
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Hobhouse, Hy. (Somerset, E.)
Ropner, Col. Robert
Bull, William James
Hogg, Lindsay
Round, James
Butcher, John George
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield Brightside
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edward H.
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hennaway, Rt. Hn. Sir John H.
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew)
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbysh.
Keswick, William
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Knowles, Lees
Smith, H. C (N'rth'mb., T'neside
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth)
Smith, James P. (Lanarks.)
Chamberlain, Rt Hon. J. (Birm.
Lawson, John Grant
Spear, John Ward
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Lee, Arthur H (Hants, Fareham
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Charrington, Spencer
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Stewart, Sir M. J. M'Taggart
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Stroyan, John
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Long, Col. Charles W. (Evesham
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol S.
Thornton, Percy M.
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Tollemache, Henry James
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Valentia, Viscount
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Macdona, John Cumming
Vincent, Col Sir C E H (Sheffield)
Cranborne, Viscount
Maconochie, A. W.
Vincent, Sir Edgar (Exeter)
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
M'Calmont, Col. H L B. (Cambs.
Walker, Col. William Hall
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Majendie, James A. H.
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Webb, Col. William George
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Welby, Lt.-Col. A. C. E. (T'nton
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Milton, Viscount
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
More, Robt. Jasper (Shropshire
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne)
Finch, George H.
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow
Wills, Sir Frederick
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Morrell, George Herbert
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Fisher, William Hayes
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Wilson-Todd, W. H. (Yorks.)
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward A.
Morrison, James Archibald
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath-
Garfit, William
Morton, Arthur H. A (Deptford
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Godson, Sir Augustus Frederick
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin&amp;Nairn
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Gore, Hn G R. C. Ormsby- (Salop
Myers, William Henry
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Gore, Hon. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.)
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Parker, Gilbert
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Duffy, William J.
M'Dermott, Patrick
Ambrose, Robert
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Mooney, John J.
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Flynn, James Christopher
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Boland, John
Fuller, J. M. F.
Moss, Samuel
Boyle, James
Gilhooly, James
Murphy, John
Brigg, John
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Burke, E. Haviland-
Hayden, John Patrick
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Burns, John
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Chas. Seale-
Norman, Henry
Caldwell, James
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Horniman, Frederick John
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Channing, Francis Allston
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Colville, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Connor, T. P. (Liverpool)
Craig, Robert Hunter
Lambert, George
O'Malley, William
Crean, Eugene
Leamy, Edmund
O'Mara, James
Delany, William
Leng, Sir John
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Donelan, Captain A.
Lough, Thomas
Partington, Oswald
Doogan, P. C.
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Pirie, Duncan V.
Power, Patrick Joseph
Sullivan, Donal
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Priestley, Arthur
Thomas, F. Freeman-(Hastings
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth
Reddy, M.
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Dillon and Captain Norton.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Weir, James Galloway
Shipman, Dr. John G.
White, Luke (York, F. R.)
The Chairman left the Chair to make his Report to the House.
Resolutions to be reported upon Monday next; Committee to sit again upon Monday next.
SUPPLY [6TH JUNE].
Resolutions reported.
ARMY ESTIMATES, 1901&#x2013;2.
1. "That a sum, not exceeding £;15,977,000, be granted to His Majesty, to defray the Charge for Transport and Remounts, which will come in course of payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902."
2. "That a sum, not exceeding £;345,000, be granted to His Majesty, to defray the Charge for the Ordnance Factories (the cost of the Productions of which will be charged to the Army, Navy, and Indian and Colonial Governments), which will come in course of payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902."
Resolutions read a second time.
First Resolution:;
MR. PIRIE (Aberdeen, N.) thought the very magnitude of this Vote justified further investigation than could be given to it in the few hours discussion of the previous day. He desired particularly to impress upon the Leader of the House that these Votes in regard to operations in South Africa were all discussed on the distinct understanding that the promise of a full inquiry into the conduct of the war was a promise in the general acceptation of the word;namely, that a promise was a promise, and not, as the right hon. Gentleman had recently defined it, something to be carried out when the party to whom the promise Was given chose to exact it. In any case,
however, the House would exact the fulfilment of that promise. The item of this Vote with regard to which he had given notice of his intention to move a reduction was for the transport of troops returning from South Africa. From the recent quarterly Returns giving the strength of the garrisons in South Africa on the 1st February and the 1st May last, it appeared that there was an enormous disproportion between the number of officers and the number of men returning home not as invalids compared with the proportion of officers to men remaining in South Africa. According to the Return of 1st February, the number of officers sent home was 1,214, as against 11,109 men;a proportion of one officer to nine men; whereas the proportion of officers to men remaining in South Africa was one to thirty-two. That disproportion certainly required some explanation, although he could surmise several good reasons for it. When an explanation was asked on the 5th March the Secretary of State for War merely said the preparation of a Return would entail very considerable labour. But a new Return was not asked for. What was wanted was merely an explanation of the existing Return, and it was no good issuing Returns at all if, when an explanation was asked for, Members were treated in this high-handed fashion. He moved the reduction standing in his name.
Amendment proposed;
"To leave out '£;15,977,000,' and insert '£;15,990,900,' instead thereof.";(Mr. Pirie.)
Question proposed, "That '£;15,977,000' stand part of the Resolution."
CAPTAIN NORTON hoped the Secretary of State for War would give some explanation in regard to this matter. He could quite understand that a large number of these officers had necessarily returned home in consequence of the diminution of the number of generals in South Africa with their large staffs, but
he did not think that that would account for the great disproportion. This was a matter in which the country took a very great interest, and, unless a satisfactory explanation was given, it would be believed that favouritism was at work by which men of high position or officers were allowed to return home much more freely than the men of the rank and file.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR WAR (Mr. BRODRICK, Surrey, Guildford) said the explanation was very simple. The exchange of officers must be greater than the exchange of men in a campaign of any magnitude. A number of officers had been summoned from India to replace others, and no doubt a considerable number of officers who had left their staff appointments had come home in order to resume their ordinary duties, It was
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Gore, Hn G R. C. Ormsby- (Salop
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Gore, Hn. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc)
Pretyman, Ernest George
Allhusen, Augustus Hy. Eden
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Purvis, Robert
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Green, Walford D (Wednesbury
Randles, John S.
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Greene, Sir E W (Bury S. Edm'ds
Reid, James (Greenock)
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Remnant, James Farquharson
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Gretton, John
Renwick, George
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge)
Banbury, Frederick George
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Hamilton, Rt Hn L'rd G (Midd'x
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Hamilton, Marq. of (L'nd'nd'ry
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Bond, Edward
Hanbury, Rt. Hn. Robert W.
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Brassey, Albert
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Bull, William James
Heider, Augustus
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Hermon-Hodge, Robert T.
Smith, H C (N'rth'mb. Tyneside
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hogg, Lindsay
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbyshire
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brights'd)
Spear, John Ward
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Keswick, William
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth)
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J. (Birm
Lawson, John Grant
Stroyan, John
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Lee, A. H. (Hants., Fareham)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Charrington, Spencer
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Thornton, Percy M.
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Tufnell, Lt.-Col. Edward
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Long, Rt. Hn. W. (Bristol, S.)
Valentia, Viscount
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Vincent, Col. Sir C E H (Sheffield
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Lowther, C. (Cumb. Eskdale)
Vincent, Sir Edgar (Exeter)
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Macdona, John Cumming
Walker, Col. William Hall
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Maconochie, A. W.
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Cranborne, Viscount
M' Calmont, Col. H. L. B (Cambs
Webb, Col. William George
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Majendie, James A. H.
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E. (Taunton
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Welby, Sir Chas. G. E. (Notts.
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Milton, Viscount
Wills, Sir Frederick
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow)
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Morrell, George Herbert
Wortley, Rt. Hn. C. B. Stuart-
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Finch, George H.
Morrison, James Archibald
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Fisher, William Hayes
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Fitzroy, Hn. Edward Algernon
Parker, Gilbert
Godson, Sir Augustus F.
Pemberton, John S. G.
Gordon, Hn J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Penn, John
extremely desirable that, in a campaign like the present, officers should not have to bear too long the great strain put upon them by operations in the field. This was a matter of policy, and had nothing to do with the officers themselves, The reason of his refusal a few days before to give the hon. Member the details for which he asked was that in most cases references had to be made, to South Africa for absolute statements from the officer in command of every staff officer who came home to explain the precise cause of his return. That would entail an enormous amount of labour, which at this stage of the campaign was not desirable.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 123; Noes, 60, (Division List No. 228.)
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Connor, Jas. (Wicklow, W.
Ambrose, Robert
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Malley, William
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Chas. Seale-
O'Mara, James
Boyle, James
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Brigg, John
Horniman, Frederick John
Partington, Oswald
Burke, E. Haviland-
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Burns, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
Priestley, Arthur
Caldwell, James
Lambert, George
Reddy, M.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Leamy, Edmund
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Chanaing, Francis Allston
Lough, Thomas
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Colville, John
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Sullivan, Donal
Craig, Robert Hunter
M'Dermott, Patrick
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Crean, Eugene
Mooney, John J.
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.
Delany, William
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Dillon, John
Morton, E. J. C. (Devonport)
Weir, James Galloway
Donelan, Captain A.
Moss, Samuel
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Doogan, P. C.
Murphy, John
Duffy, William J.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Pirie and Captain Norton.
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Norman, Henry
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That this House doth agree with the Committee in the said Resolution."
MR. DILLON protested against the monstrous waste of public money involved in this Vote. Throughout the discussion in Committee the Government failed to answer any of the criticisms brought forward. Never in his experience had he seen an Estimate drawn up in a more loose, careless, and reckless fashion. The items with regard to transport seemed to be so absurd as to be quite incapable of explanation. In fact, the only possible explanation was that the Government had been so often accused of miscalculation and want of foresight that the War Office clerks had been given instructions to make this Estimate as large as they could, so that by no possibility could a Supplementary Estimate be required. With regard to the remounts, it was admitted on both sides that through carelessness and bad management there had been an enormous slaughter of horses in South Africa. That involved not only a great waste of money, but also horrible cruelty. It was absurd to ask for a further Vote of £;3,000,000 for remounts without any assurance being given that the system would be altered. But that was not all, for within the last few days a statement had appeared in The Times from one of its correspondents in South Africa that no horses were available for one of
the Yeomanry battalions, notwithstanding the fact that the men were practically dismounted, the reason given being that all the remounts were required by the new drafts coming out in order that they might practise riding.
MR. BRODRICK thought that he was entitled to rely on the evidence of the general commanding the troops in South Africa rather than on that of any correspondent as to the class of horses sent out and the use made of them; and he could hardly be asked to provide more troops and more horses, or better troops and better horses, than Lord Kitchener himself required. So long as he was able;without having asked for it;to quote Lord Kitchener's opinion in his favour in regard to remounts, he could hardly be called into question. He had already explained that the Vote for sea transport was necessarily nearly as high as last year because the hope was entertained that they would be able to bring home a large proportion of the troops employed at the front. With regard to transport in the colony, they had been able to reduce the Vote largely, because last year large sums had to be paid for the actual provision of transport wagons and various other accessories which were not needed to be repeated this year. Moreover, in many cases better contracts for transports had been made. Lord Kitchener had given his personal attention to this particular business, a business
which he understood probably better than any other man alive, and he had been able to make large reductions in the contracts made and in the cost of conveying troops in South Africa.
CAPTAIN NORTON said that the complaint was that more than £;7,000,000 had been paid during the past year to mount our troops, but nevertheless they had been abominably mounted. To say that Lord Kitchener was perfectly satisfied was like locking the stable door after the steed was stolen. The whole management of this department, from top to bottom, had been of the most shocking description. Before the war commenced he had time after time called the attention of the Government to the need of strengthening the veterinary department, but without success. At present, the veterinary officers in South Africa numbered only one to 7,000 horses. It was true that a number of civilian veterinary surgeons had been sent out, but they were merely the sweepings of the profession, and even counting these there was only one veterinary surgeon to about 200 or 300 horses.
MR. BRODRICK pointed out that no money was taken under this Vote for the Army Veterinary Department.
CAPTAIN NORTON said he was dealing with the department only as bearing on the question of remounts. If the animals had been properly cared for the taxpayers would have been called upon to pay a much smaller sum than was now the case.
MR. O'MARA (Kilkenny, S.) asked whether the Vote included any estimate for bringing home the horses. If it was intended only for bringing home the men, how was it that last year, when about a quarter of a million of men and the same number of horses were taken out, the transport cost about £;10,000,000, whereas this year to bring home about the same number of men without the horses the estimated cost was nearly the same? If the animals were to be brought
AYES.
Acland-Hood. Capt. Sir Alex F.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Balfour, Maj. K. R. (Christch'ch
Alluhsen, Augustus Henry E.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Banbury, Frederick George
home he should like to know what was to be done with them.
THE FINANCIAL SECRETARY TO THE WAR OFFICE (Lord STANLEY, Lancashire, Westhoughton) said there was no intention of bringing the horses home. Any horses that could be sold would be sold in South Africa. It was a question whether the nucleus of a remount department should not be formed in South Africa. He believed that in the future South Africa would be able to provide remounts as well as any other part of the Empire.
MR. CREAN (Cork, S.E.) did not believe there would be any necessity to bring home the soldiers that had been sent out to South Africa; they would be required to keep the few remaining Boers in subjection. They would also be required for the protection of the people who were taken out and settled on farms. In fact, it seemed more probable that this money would be required for taking troops out than for bringing soldiers home. The proceedings would, however, be watched very carefully, and if it was found that soldiers were sent out the Secretary of State for War would be reminded of his statement that the money was for the purpose of bringing the troops home.
MR. FLAVIN (Kerry, N.) asked how it was calculated that £;9,500,000 would be required for the purposes of bringing home 250,000 men? That worked out at about £;40 per head, but that was surely a mistake. Perhaps the Financial Secretary could give the Committee the total number of men sent out and the total cost, so that they could see the average price per head.
LORD STANLEY said he had not the actual figures with him, and therefore he could not give the information asked for.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 124; Noes, 41. (Division List No. 229.)
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Greene, Sir E. W. (B'ry S Edm'ds
Pretyman, Ernest George
Beach, Rt. Hn Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Gretton, John
Purvis, Robert
Bond, Edward
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Randles, John S.
Brassey, Albert
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Reid, James (Greenock)
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Hamilton, Rt Hn. Ld. G (Midd'x
Remnant, James Farquharson
Bull, William James
Hamilton, Marq of (L'nd'nderry
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Caldwell, James
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. Charles T.
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derhysh.
Helder, Augustus
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Hogg, Lindsay
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew)
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.
Hope, J. F. (Sheffild, Brightside
Smith, H. C (Northmb, Tyneside
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.
Charrington, Spencer
Keswick, William
Spear, John Ward
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Lawson, John Grant
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Lee, Arthur H. (Hants., Farehm
Stroyan, John
Colville, John
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North
Long, Rt. Hon Walter (Bristol S.
Thornton, Percy M.
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Craig, Robert Hunter
Macdona, John Cumming
Valentia, Viscount
Cranborne, Viscount
Maconochie, A. W.
Vincent, Col. Sir C E H (Sheffield
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
M'Calmont, Col. H. L. B (Camb.
Vincent, Sir Edgar (Exeter)
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Majendie, James A. H.
Walker, Col. William Hall
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Milton, Viscount
Webb, Col. Wm. George
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Weir, James Galloway
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Morgan, David J (Walthamst'w
Welby, Lt. Col. A C. E Taunton
Finch, George H.
Morrell, George Herbert
Welby, Sir Charles G. E (Notts.)
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Fisher, William Hayes
Morrison, James Archibald
Wills, Sir Frederick
Fitzroy, Hn. Edward Algernon
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Godson, Sir Augustus Frederick
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Gordon, Hn J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Norman, Henry
Gore, Hn G. R. C Ormsby- (Salop
Parker, Gilbert
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Gore, Hn. S. F. Ormsby- (Lincs.)
Pemberton, John S. G.
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Penn, John
Green, Walford D (Wednesbury
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
NOES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.
Ambrose, Robert
Hayne, Rt. Hn. Chas. Seale-
O'Connor, Jas. (Wicklow, W.)
Boyle, James
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Malley, William
Burke, E. Haviland-
Lambert, George
O'Mara, James
Burns, John
Leamy, Edmund
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Pirie, Duncan V.
Crean, Eugene
M'Dermott, Patrick
Power, Patrick Joseph
Delany, William
Mooney, John J.
Reddy, M.
Donelan, Captain A.
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Doogan, P. C.
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Duffy, William J.
Moss, Samuel
Sullivan, Donal
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan
Murphy, John
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Nannetti, Joseph P.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Dillon and Captain Norton.
Flynn, James Christopher
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Second Resolution proposed.
Further consideration of postponed resolution deferred till Monday next.
BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE.
On the motion for adjournment;
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I said that the first business on Monday would be the Civil List. Before that there will be what I believe will be a formal proceeding in Committee of Ways and Means, when
the Chancellor of the Exchequer will move a resolution to enable him to make some alterations in that part of the Budget dealing with the duty on sugar and glucose. I do not think the matter is very important, but I wish to make it clear that that resolution will be moved.
Adjourned at twenty-eight minutes before Two of the clock till Monday next.
HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Monday, 10th June, 1901.
PRIVATE BILL BUSINESS.
HUMBER COMMERCIAL RAILWAY AND DOCK BILL. (BY ORDER.)
As amended, considered.
*MR. CHARLES M'ARTHUR (Liverpool, Exchange) said he rose to move the omission from Clause 62 of words which put the risks of removal on the master or owner of a ship. The Bill was intended to authorise the construction of a dock and other works at Great Grimsby, on the banks of the Humber, the charging of dues for the use of the docks, the appointment of a dock master and other officials to regulate the movement of vessels in and out of the dock, and the making of by-laws under the Harbours, Docks, and Piers Act, 1847. Words appeared in the clause by which the dock company sought to exempt themselves from their common law liability for damage caused in the removal of ships by the acts of their servants. He thought that if the dock company's servants were guilty of any neglect or default in moving the vessel about the dock, the company ought to be held responsible for any damage thereby caused. The common law said that they were responsible, and he was not aware of any dock or harbour company which had sought thus to amend the common law in that respect. There were many ways in which a vessel might be injured through the neglect of the dock employees. It might be sent into a dock, for instance, where there was an insufficient depth of water, and it might ground on a mud bank or on rubbish or wreckage which had been allowed to accumulate there. It might, while it was in charge of officials of the dock, come into collision with another vessel. In all other ports in the United Kingdom the dock companies were held responsible for damage caused under such conditions, yet under this clause the owner or master of the ship was to be made responsible. This was entirely a new departure, and he believed an unintentional one on the part of the pro-
moters. He could not understand how the clause crept into the Bill. It certainly was not there when it came up for Second Reading. He had been asked by the shipowners of the United Kingdom to move that these words be deleted, and he trusted that the promoters would consent to that being done. In that case there would be no further opposition to the Bill. He begged to move the omission of the words to which he had referred.
MR. DOUGHTY (Great Grimsby): On behalf of the promoters of the Bill I desire to withdraw the words referred to.
Amendment agreed to.
Bill to be read the third time.
PRESTATYN WATER BILL [Lords] (BY ORDER.)
Read a second time, and committed.
HAMILTON BURGH PROVISIONAL ORDER CONFIRMATION BILL [Lords]. (BY ORDER.)
Under Section 7, Sub-section (2) of the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act, 1899.
Order read, for resuming Adjourned Debate on Question [24th May], "That the clause (Water supply to public offices) proposed on consideration be read a second time.";(The Lord Advocate.)
Question again proposed, "That the clause be read a second time."
Debate resumed;
THE LORD ADVOCATE (Mr. A. GRAHAM MURRAY, Buteshire) said that after consultation with the War Office he found there was no real necessity for the insertion of this clause, as the military authorities had a perfect right to insist on a supply of water to War Office buildings for domestic purposes. He therefore proposed to ask leave to withdraw it. As some discussion took place on the last occasion as to the desirability of allowing Amendments to be introduced at this stage, he would like to remind the House that when the Private Bill Procedure (Scotland) Act was under considera-
tion provision was specially introduced to allow Amendments to be introduced on consideration, as, unlike the practice in the other House, it was not possible to introduce them on the motion for the Third Reading.
MR. BLAKE (Longford, S.) said the point raised on the last occasion was not so much the desirability of introducing Amendments on the consideration stage, but rather the importance of insisting that these matters should be threshed out at the local inquiry.
MR. A. GRAHAM MURRAY: There was no local inquiry in this case. It was an unopposed Bill. I quite agree that when there is a local inquiry these clauses should go before it.
Motion, by leave, withdrawn.
Clause withdrawn.
Bill to be read the third time to-morrow.
PRIVATE BILLS (STANDING ORDER 62 COMPLIED WITH).
Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table Report from one of the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills, That, in the case of the following Bills, referred on the First Reading thereof, Standing Order No. 62 has been complied with, viz.:;
Metropolitan District Railway Bill.
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill.
Ordered, That the Bills be read a second time.
PROVISIONAL ORDER BILLS [Lords] (STANDING ORDERS APPLICABLE THERETO COMPLIED WITH).
MR. SPEAKER laid upon the Table Report from one of the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills, That, in the case of the following Bill, originating in the Lords, referred on the First Reading thereof, the Standing Orders which are applicable thereto have been complied with, viz.:;
Education Board Provisional Order Confirmation (Acton) Bill [Lords].
Ordered, That the Bill be read a second time to-morrow.
PROVISIONAL ORDER BILLS (NO STANDING ORDERS APPLICABLE).
MR. SPEAKER laid upon the Table Report from one of the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills, That, in the case of the following Bill, referred on the First Reading thereof, no Standing Orders are applicable, viz.:;
Military Lands Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill.
Ordered, That the Bill be read a second time to-morrow.
PRIVATE BILLS (PETITION FOR ADDI- TIONAL PROVISION) (STANDING ORDERS NOT COMPLIED WITH.)
Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table Report from one of the Examiners of Petitions for Private Bills, That, in the case of the Petition for additional Provision in the following Bill, the Standing Orders have not been complied with, Viz.:;
Metropolitan District Railway Bill.
Ordered, That the Report be referred to the Select Committee on Standing Orders.
ALDEBURGH CORPORATION (WATER BILL.
BURY CORPORATION BILL.
GOLBORNE GAS BILL.
Read the third time, and passed.
LONDON COUNTY COUNCIL (TRAM WAYS AND STREET WIDENINGS) BILL.
Duke of Cornwall's consent signified Bill read the third time, and passed.
METROPOLITAN RAILWAY BILL.
SHIREOAKS, LAUGHTON, AND MALTBY RAILWAY BILL.
Read the third time, and passed.
CROMER WATER BILL.
LONDON AND INDIA DOCKS (NEW WORKS) BILL.
OAKHAM WATER BILL [Lords].
As amended, considered; to be read the third time.
SOUTHAMPTON AND WINCHESTER GREAT WESTERN JUNCTION RAIL- WAY BILL.
As amended, considered; Amendments made; Bill to be read the third time.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) PROVISIONAL ORDERS (HOUSING OF THE WORKING CLASSES) BILL.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) PROVISIONAL ORDER (HOUSING OF WORKING CLASSES) (No. 2) BILL.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) PROVISIONAL ORDER (No. 3) BILL.
Read a second time, and committed.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 5) BILL.
Read a second time, and committed.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 7) BILL.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 8) BILL.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 9) BILL.
Read a second time, and committed.
OCAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 10) BILL.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 11) BILL.
LOCAL GONERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 12) BILL.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDER (PORT) BILL.
Read a second time, and committed.
ARDROSSAN GAS AND WATER CONFIRMATION BILL (UNDER THE PRIVATE LEGISLATION PROCEDURE (SCOTLAND) ACT, 1899).
Read a second time; to be considered to-morrow.
PETITIONS.
BOROUGH FUNDS ACT (1872) AMEND- MENT (LONDON) BILL.
Petition from Camberwell, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
COAL MINES (EMPLOYMENT) BILL.
Petition from Westhoughton, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
EDUCATION (CONTINUATION SCHOOLS) BILL.
Petition from Leicester, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION.
Petition from Cardiff, for alteration of Law; to lie upon the Table.
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION (HIGHER GRADE AND EVENING CONTINUA- TION SCHOOLS).
Petition from Burradon, for alteration if Law; to lie upon the Table.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES OFFICERS' SUPERANNUATION BILL.
Petition from Bradford, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
MARRIAGE WITH A DECEASED WIFE'S SISTER BILL
Petition from Newark-on-Trent, against; to lie upon the Table.
MINES (EIGHT HOURS) BILL.
Petition from Westhoughton, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
PROTECTION OF PRIVATE CAPITAL.
Petition of E. E. Parkes Rhodes, for Legislation; to lie upon the Table.
PUBLIC HEALTH (SCOTLAND) ACT, 1897.
Petition from Orkney, for alteration of Law; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS ON SUNDAY BILL
Petitions in favour; from Church Gresley; and Birmingham; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN BILL.
Petitions against; from Bristol; Taunton; Wellington; North Bristol; Monksilver; Frome; Cheltenham; and Bath; to lie upon the Table.
Petitions in favour; from Deptford; London; Ambleside; Orton; Sleaford (two); Kettering; Fulwell (two); Millfield; Hendon (five); Sunderland (sixteen); Aylesbury with Walton; Lamberhurst; Wadhurst; Tisbury; Edinburgh; Workington; Ramsgate; Portsmouth (three); Tottenham (two); Small Heath; Islington; Beeston; Brierley Hill (two); Allington; Midsomer Norton; Wolverhampton; Kirby Cane; and Wallasey; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN (SCOTLAND) BILL.
Petitions in favour; from Orkney; Sandwick (two); St. Andrews and
Deerness; Craig; Grange (two); Boharn; Dron; Ordiquhill; Ross and Cromarty; Botriphine; Arbroath and St. Vigeans; and Aberbrothock; to lie upon the Table.
SHOPS BILL.
Petition from Edinburgh, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
SOVEREIGN'S OATH ON ACCESSION BILL.
Petitions against; from Buntingford; Abergavenny; Southwick; and Liverpool; to lie upon the Table.
TIED HOUSES ABOLITION BILL.
Petition from Aberbrothock, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
TROUT FISHING ANNUAL CLOSE TIME (SCOTLAND) BILL.
Petition from Aberbrothock, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
RETURNS, REPORTS, ETC.
PARIS INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION, 1900 (ROYAL COMMISSION).
Copy presented, of Report of the Commissioners appointed to advise respecting the procuring and transmission of British and Colonial products to the Paris Exhibition of 1900 (Vols. I and II.) [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
POLICE (COUNTIES AND BOROUGHS)
Copy presented, of Reports of His Majesty's Inspectors of Constabulary for the year ended 29th September, 1900 [by Act]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 200.]
INTERMEDIATE EDUCATION (IRELAND).
Copy presented, of Rules and Programme of Examinations for 1902 [by Act]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 199.]
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD (IRELAND).
Copy presented, of Order dividing the Urban County District of Strabane into Wards [by Act]; to lie upon the Table.
SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE (IRELAND).
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 7th June; Mr. Austen Chamberlain]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 201.]
VOLUNTARY SCHOOLS ACT, 1897 (ASSOCIATIONS).
Copy presented, of List of (1) Associations constituted under the Voluntary Schools Act, 1897; (2) Associated Schools and Amounts of Aid Grant paid; and (3) Unassociated Schools and Amounts of Aid Grant paid, 1900&#x2013;1901 [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 1894.
Copy presented, of Order in Council of 13th May, 1901, approving certain Bye-laws made by the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board, with respect to the contribution to be made towards the Pilotage Funds of the Liverpool District by the Masters and Mates holding Pilotage Certificates [by Act]; to lie upon the Table.
MERCANTILE MARINE (COLOUR TESTS.)
Copy presented, of Report on the Sight Tests used in the Mercantile Marine for the year ended 31st December, 1900 (in continuation of [C. 116]) [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
SOUTH AFRICA.
Copy presented, of Report of the Transvaal Concessions Commission, dated the 19th April, 1901. Vol. II., Minutes of Evidence [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
Copy presented, of Report of the Transvaal Concessions Commission, dated the 19th April, 1901. Vol. III., Appendix of Documents [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
Copy presented, of Report of the Land Settlement Commission, South Africa, dated 28th November, 1900. Vol. II., Documents, Minutes of Evidence, etc. [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
BOUNTIES ON SHIPBUILDING, ETC. (COMMERCIAL, No. 4, 1901).
Copy presented, of Reports from His Majesty's Representatives Abroad re-
specting Bounties on Shipbuilding, etc. [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
TRADE REPORTS (ANNUAL SERIES).
Copies presented, of Diplomatic and Consular Reports, Annual Series, Nos. 2621 and 2622 [by Command]; to lie upon the Table.
NEW WRIT.
New Writ for the county of Warwick (South Western or Stratford-on-Avon Division), in the room of Colonel Victor Milward, deceased.;(Sir William Walrond.)
QUESTIONS.
SOUTH AFRICAN WAR;EMPLOY- MENT BY BOERS OF ARMED NATIVES.
MR. PLATT-HIGGINS (Salford, N.): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether any cases have come to his notice in which the Boers have employed natives for military purposes during the war; whether any cases have been reported in which Boers have flogged natives who they believed had given information to the British or otherwise assisted them; and whether any instances have transpired of natives being found in arms or of attempts having been made by the Boers to induce natives to take up arms against the British.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR WAR (Mr. BRODRICK, Surrey, Guildford): Yes, Sir. During the siege of Ladysmith the Boers employed armed natives on outpost duty at night. At the engagement of Vaal Krantz several Kaffirs fired on the British troops, and some were afterwards found on the ground killed or wounded. The systematic intimidation of natives by the Boers throughout the campaign has been notorious; as regards recent in stances several natives were officially reported to have been shot by the Boers in November last. In February J. J. de Jager was convicted at Harrismith of murdering three natives, and hanged his defence was that in one case he acted under orders, and that in the two other
cases he believed the natives to be spies. Further, I need hardly remind the House of the terrible treatment of Abraham Esau at Calvinia, for which no reason was assigned except his pro-British sympathies.
BADEN POWELL'S POLICE.
MR. DILLON (Mayo, E.): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether any, and, if any, what, evidence as to character has been required from candidates for Baden Powell's South African police.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE COLONIES (Mr. J. CHAMBERLAIN, Birmingham, W.): All candidates have been required to furnish at least two testimonials to character and to give the names of two references to respectability of character and fitness for service.
FALSE INFORMATION FROM THE FRONT.
MR. DILLON: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether, in view of the outrageously false telegrams from South Africa recently sent through Reuter's and other agencies, and the absolute dearth for a long period of any detailed or reliable news of the war and the military situation in South Africa, he will undertake to allow correspondents to go to the front without reference to the politics of the journals they represent, and whether he will see that the censorship is used in future only for military objects, and not for the purpose of keeping the public in the dark as to the situation.
MR. WEIR (Ross and Cromarty): At the same time may I ask whether, in view of Lord Kitchener's denial of the alleged defeat of Beyers's commando, the right hon. Gentleman will state how this telegram came to be passed by the censor, what steps will be taken to prevent correspondents at the seat of war from dispatching false information, and whether correspondents will be deprived of their permits when shown to have communicated false reports respecting operations in the field.
MR. BRODRICK: Lord Kitchener is considering the circumstances in which the incorrect telegrams complained
of have recently been sent. I will undertake that all such cases are suitably dealt with. I must point out that the censor is not responsible for the accuracy of the telegrams that pass through his hands, but he is responsible that nothing should be telegraphed to this country likely to give information to the enemy. As regards the general dearth of information about which the hon. Member asks, there has been no withholding of information from the House. It is obvious that the reports of the generals are necessarily summaries of the events that have taken place, and those summaries have been duly published. It is impossible for any general to allow a mass of correspondents to accompany the troops in order to represent newspapers of all descriptions. He can only allow a certain number.
MR. DILLON: Will the right hon. Gentleman undertake to allow correspondents to go to the front irrespective of the politics of the journals they represent? It so happens that all the correspondents at the front represent only journals supporting the Government.
MR. BRODRICK: I have no knowledge of the politics of the journals represented by the correspondents at the front. The matter rests entirely with Lord Kitchener, who, I believe, is in complete ignorance of the politics of all journals.
MR. WEIR: Seeing that the Secretary for War has been given a specific case in which the information sent to the newspapers has been false, I should like to ask whether he will take action without delay against the correspondent?
MR. BRODRICK: I have not yet heard anything of the explanation of the correspondent, and I have told the House that Lord Kitchener will suitably deal with any such cases.
MAJOR RASCH (Essex, Chelmsford): I wish to know whether the right hon. Gentleman will consider the advisability of prosecuting the propagators of false news at home, such as Mr. Stead, particularly in connection with the letter stated to have been written by Lieutenant Morrison?
MR. BRODRICK: I stated to the House a few days ago that all these false reports are highly discreditable to those who publish them.
LINDLEY DISASTER.
MR. DILLON: I beg to ask the Secretary for War whether he can state what steps have been taken to ascertain the reason why the 10th Battalion of Imperial Yeomanry and other mounted troops, in all a force of 1,500 men with guns, which was informed on the 23rd May that Colonel Spragge's force was hard pressed at Lindley but could not hold out until Sunday, the 27th, never reached Lindley although it moved out of Kroonstadt on the 23rd, and the distance between Lindley and Kroonstadt is only forty miles; and whether any inquiry has been held; if so, what was the finding of the court.
MR. BRODRICK: The hon. Member has been misinformed as to the dates. On the 23rd May the 10th Battalion Imperial Yeomanry was at Zandfontein, fourteen miles west of Bothaville, and over fifty miles from Kroonstadt as the crow flies. No inquiry has been held, nor is any deemed necessary.
MR. DILLON: But did not the force actually start and lose its way on the road?
MR. BRODRICK: I am not so informed. But the distance shows that it could not have reached Lindley in time in any case.
FARM BURNING.
MR. JOHN ELLIS (Nottinghamshire Rushcliffe): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether the policy and practice of burning farm buildings, mills, cottages, and other buildings in South Africa for military reasons has been discontinued; and, if so, at what date and on whose instructions; and whether he can supplement the figures given up to the end of January, 1901, in the Return laid before the House by the figures for any and each of the months since, during which this destruction may have been carried into effect.
MR. BRODRICK: I informed the House some time ago that, except in
cases of treachery and certain recognised military offences, farm houses would not be burned. Specific orders to this effect were given by Lord Kitchener on 7th December, 1900, and I have every reason to think they have been observed. I have no further information as to numbers, but I have requested Lord Kitchener to have a return prepared.
MR. FLAVIN (Kerry, N.): May I ask whether houses have been burned indiscriminately, whether occupied or not?
MR. BRODRICK: I do not think that can be the case. The Return will show the details.
MR. FLAVIN: May I inform the right hon. Gentlemans;(cries of "Order.")
*MR. SPEAKER: The hon. Member cannot impart information by way of a question.
MR. FLAVIN: May I ask whether it is a fact that vacant houses have been burned by the British authorities?
*MR. SPEAKER: Order, order&#x0021; That has been answered.
MR. FLAVIN: I have it on the statement of one of the Volunteers who burned the houses down.
DISCHARGE OF RETURNED VOLUNTEERS.
MR. RENWICK (Newcastle-on-Tyne): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War, in view of the dissatisfaction which exists amongst Volunteers who have recently returned to this country after having been on active service in South Africa with their line battalions for over twelve months, owing to their having been discharged with seven days furlough and pay, counting from date of arrival, instead of twenty-eight days furlough and pay which they expected to receive, whether arrangements can now be made to grant the extra furlough and pay.
THE FINANCIAL SECRETARY TO THE WAR OFFICE (Lord STANLEY, Lancashire, Westhoughton): The question is under consideration.
IMPERIAL YEOMANRY PAY CLAIMS.
COLONEL BROOKFIELD (Sussex, Rye): I beg to ask the Financial Secretary to the War Office whether he is aware that, owing to the battalions of Imperial Yeomanry in South Africa being broken up and the companies scattered, there has been much irregularity in the rendering of proper pay lists and in settling the claims of individual non-commissioned officers and men who have returned home, some of them in credit for considerable sums of money, which, through being out of communication with their companies, they are unable to obtain; and whether any steps are being taken to expedite and facilitate an early adjustment of claims of this description.
LORD STANLEY: Men returning from South Africa without statements of accounts are treated as follows:;Firstly, they are taken on pay from the date of embarkation; secondly, they are granted in respect of any arrears of pay they may claim a provisional payment of £;5 or thirty days pay and messing allowance, whichever is the greater, or if they can show any proof beyond their own bare statement of the sum due to them, they are granted four-fifths of the amount which appears to be due to them. Constant reminders are sent to South Africa to expedite the transmission of accounts. I know the hon. Member appreciates the difficulties the authorities are under, and I think he and the House will agree with me that more cannot be expected to be done at present.
VOLUNTEER OFFICERS AND ARMY RANK.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL PRYCE-JONES (Montgomery Boroughs): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War, seeing that officers of embodied Militia and the City Imperial Volunteers have been granted honorary rank in the Army on being disembodied and disbanded, whether a similar indulgence could be granted to those Volunteer officers who have served with the Volunteer service companies.
MR. BRODRICK: It has already been decided that Volunteer officers who have
served in South Africa shall be granted honorary rank in the Army.
IRISH VOLUNTEERS.
MR. NANNETTI (Dublin, College Green): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether his attention has been called to the fact that some corps of Volunteers composed of Irish youths have for some time past been drilled in Portobello and other barracks in Dublin, and that these Volunteers are attached to English Volunteer regiments; can he state to what religious denomination they belong, and, seeing that the raising and training of Volunteers in Ireland is illegal, out of what fund the expenses are defrayed.
LORD STANLEY: Certain individuals, not corps, of Volunteers are allowed to drill with Regulars in Dublin, but their drills do not count towards efficiency; no expense is, therefore, incurred by the public, and no illegality is committed. No information is to hand as to the religion of these individuals.
MR. NANNETTI: Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that the police issue gun licences to these youths?
LORD STANLEY: I know nothing about it.
MR. NANNETTI: I shall put a further question.
MILITIA COMPETITIVE EXAMINATION.
MAJOR RASCH: I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he can state on what date the Militia competitive examination will take place; how many commissions will be offered, and in what branches; whether marks for service will be allowed; and when the regulations will be published.
LORD STANLEY: Full information in regard to the Militia competitive examination was published on Saturday evening.
CRETAN CAMPAIGN MEDAL.
MR. MALCOLM (Suffolk, Stowmarket): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for War whether he is now
prepared to recommend His Majesty to allow those officers, non-commissioned officers, and men who served in the last Cretan campaign to wear the medal granted by Prince George of Greece for that campaign, and which is already worn by the troops of other European Powers which were engaged in the same operations.
MR. BRODRICK: This question has been carefully considered, and it was decided that there should be no Cretan medal. I am not, therefore, prepared to reopen it. I think my honourable friend is in error in thinking that the troops of other Powers are wearing the medal.
NEWFOUNDLAND.
MR. MALCOLM: I beg to ask the Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs if he can state whether there is any negotiation proceeding between Newfoundland and the United States with a view to renewing the Bond-Blaine Convention, or to signing any similar treaty.
THE UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Viscount CRANBORNE, Rochester): His Majesty's Government are not aware of any such negotiations.
CHINA;BRITISH TRADE IN THE YANG-TSZE VALLEY.
MR. HERBERT ROBERTS (Denbighshire, W.): I beg to ask the President of the Board of Trade whether he is aware that the Director General of the Hamburg-American Steamship Company has recently stated that a development of trade may confidently be expected in the Yang-tsze Valley, and that the Hamburg-American Company were co-operating with the North German Lloyd Company in the establishment of a line of steamers which would carry the German flag as far up the Yang-tsze as the river was navigable; and whether he is aware that the Hamburg-American line has further arranged for a regular service of steamers between Tsing-tan, and Chifu, and Tientsin; and whether, having regard to these developments, the Government are taking all practicable steps to secure
the present dominant commercial position of Great Britain in these regions.
VISCOUNT CRANBORNE: In answer to the first paragraph of the question, we have no information to the effect mentioned. With regard to the second paragraph, for the maintenance of the commercial position of Great Britain in the regions referred to as everywhere else, we must rely upon the enterprise and energy of our traders, but His Majesty's Government will do all in their power to secure for them a fair opportunity, so far as the general principles of our fiscal policy permit.
DISTURBANCES BETWEEN ENGLISH AND FRENCH TROOPS AT TIENTSIN.
MR. HERBERT ROBERTS: I beg to ask the Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs whether he is in a position to make a statement with reference to the collision which took place at Tientsin on the 2nd instant between British troops and those of the French and German contingents stationed there.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA (Lord G. HAMILTON, Middlesex, Ealing): General Gaselee reported to me on the 8th instant, that the only information available, pending the receipt of proceedings of the Court of Inquiry then sitting, was as follows;
"Riot originated with French soldiers who resented the closing of a disorderly house by our military police. Casualties: British soldiers, five wounded; French, three killed and four wounded; Germans, three wounded; Japanese, two wounded."
The day following General Gaselee telegraphed that the Court of Inquiry proved that the police acted with commendable forbearance, and only fired on mob when compelled to do so in self-defence; that large numbers of soldiers joined the French, but that the German police behaved well, assisting our police by endeavouring to get their own men to disperse. Valuable support was also given by the Japanese guard. General Gaselee also states that all is now quiet.
MR. CHARLES HOBHOUSE (Bristol, E.): May I ask for an answer to a question of which I have given private notice?
LORD G. HAMILTON: I think the hon. Member's question refers to a re-
ported disturbance which is said to have taken place subsequently. General Gaselee's second telegram was sent two days after that date, and no mention is made of it. Therefore I telegraphed to General Gaselee to ask if the report was true, and if it were true to send me particulars.
LABOUR ORDINANCE ON THE GOLD COAST.
MR. LOUGH (Islington, W.): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Colonies whether the Master and Servant Ordinance on the Gold Coast of 1893 which has just been published is still in force; and, if so, whether he can see his way to cause it to be amended so that payment of wages in kind, the apprenticeship of children of nine years of age, flogging, and the option of striking out the clause which secures schooling for the apprentice till he has passed the fourth standard should be prohibited, and clauses inserted to secure the prevention of ill treatment or sweating by overwork of young persons apprenticed under the Ordinance.
MR. J. CHAMBERLAIN: The Ordinance is still in force. The Governor will be consulted with regard to the other matters referred to in the hon. Member's question.
DUTIES ON GLUCOSE.
MR. LOUGH: I beg to ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer whether, since the Budget announcement, glucose made in Great Britain has not yielded any Excise duty, while the Customs duty of 1s. 8d. has been imposed on all quantities imported from abroad; and, if so, whether he proposes to take any steps to correct this inequality.
THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER (Sir M. HICKS BEACH, Bristol, W.): I will deal with that in Committee of Ways and Means.
CITY OF LONDON COMMISSIONER OF POLICE.
COLONEL LOCKWOOD (Essex, Epping): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether the Commissioner of Police for the City of London is responsible to the Home Secretary for the due discharge of his
duty, or does he act independently of the Home Office and of the City authorities.
*THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT (Mr. RITCHIE, Croydon): Certain regulations made by the Commissioner are subject to the Secretary of State's approval, but speaking generally the Commissioner of the City of London Police acts altogether independently of the Home Office, but subject to the control of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.
In reply to a further question by Colonel LOCKWOOD, the right hon. Gentleman admitted that this was a very ancient state of things.
BOY RECRUITS FROM INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
MR. JAMES O'CONNOR (Wicklow, W.): I beg to ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he is aware that on Monday, the 3rd instant, a man appeared before the magistrate in the South Western Court and complained that his two sons, on the completion of their time in an industrial school, had been drafted into the Army without his knowledge or consent, and that he wished to bring them up to his own trade; whether he can state upon whose order the boys have been transferred from the industrial school to the Army, in what regiment have they been enrolled, and what are their respective ages.
*MR. RITCHIE: The boys referred to enlisted from the school, with their own consent, at the ages of 14&#x00BD; and 15&#x00BD; respectively, in the band of the 4th Battalion Worcestershire Regiment. This was done under the powers conferred upon the managers of the school by Section 1 of the Reformatory and Industrial Schools Act, 1891. I find that the father has never contributed anything towards the maintenance of the boys in the school, in spite of proceedings taken against him; and I am of opinion that he has no claims to consideration, and that the enlistment is in the best interests of the boys.
LONDON WATER CHARGES.
MR. FORDE RIDLEY (Bethnal Green S. W.): I beg to ask the President of the
Local Government Board whether, in the event of the purchase of the London water companies under his proposed Bill, he will take steps to prevent the continuance of the system under which an increased rent for the use of water is charged on those houses where the rates have been increased under the quinquennial re-assessments, although no increased supply nor any alteration whatever in the supply may have taken place.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD (Mr. WALTER LONG, Bristol, S.): I am afraid I could not give any undertaking at the present time with regard to the subject referred to by my hon. friend.
THE WRECK OF THE "ASSYRIAN."
MR. HERBERT ROBERTS: I beg to ask the President of the Board of Trade whether, in connection with the recent wreck of the Layland liner at Cape Race, he has any official information to the effect that the crew of the steamer was composed almost entirely of Germans, and that they fell into a state of panic when the vessel went on the rocks; and whether he proposes to cause inquiry to be made into this matter.
THE PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF TRADE (Mr. GERALD BALFOUR, Leeds, Central): The crew of the "Assyrian" on her last voyage, which commenced at Antwerp, consisted of thirty-five persons, of whom twenty-six (including nine Germans) were foreigners. On previous voyages, commencing in the United Kingdom, her crew consisted of thirty-one or thirty-two persons, mostly of British nationality. I have no official report of the behaviour of the crew when the steamer went ashore, but the circumstances of the case will certainly form the subject of inquiry, either in the colony or in this country.
MALLAIG MAILS.
MR. JOHN DEWAR (Inverness-shire): I beg to ask the Secretary to the Treasury, as representing the Postmaster General, if he will state what additional expenditure it would be necessary to incur in order to secure a steamer from Mallaig to convey His Majesty's mails to the outlying islands via the West Coast of Skye.
THE FINANCIAL SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY (Mr. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN, Worcestershire, E.): The Postmaster General is unable to say what would be the additional expenditure involved in providing a mail steamer from Mallaig to the outlying islands via the West Coast of Skye. The increased expense, however, would certainly be considerable; and in view of the very high cost of the existing service, the Postmaster General would not be justified in recommending additional outlay for postal purposes.
VENTILATION OF THE DIVISION LOBBIES.
SIR HOWARD VINCENT (Sheffield, Central): I beg to ask the First Commissioner of Works whether he will state who is responsible for putting the electric torpedo ventilators into the division lobbies without providing the usual means for stopping them by means of a button if the draught produced causes annoyance to those having to sit under them, and, if the defect can be remedied.
THE FIRST COMMISSIONER OF WORKS (Mr. AKERS DOUGLAS, Kent, St. Augustine's): The electric motor fans in the division lobbies have been fixed by my direction. They are constructed so as to be controlled by the officials who attend to the ventilation of the building, and it would, in my opinion, be undesirable to alter that arrangement. They have been found very effective in removing vitiated air, without, so far as I am aware, any general complaint of draughts attending their use; on the contrary, I have been congratulated by hon. Members upon the great improvement resulting from their introduction. However, I shall be happy to confer with my hon. and gallant friend in the hope of alleviating the inconvenience he feels.
CHARITY COMMISSION INQUIRIES.
MR. LAWRENCE (Liverpool, Abercrombie): I beg to ask the hon. Member for the Tunbridge Division of Kent, as representing the Charity Commissioners, whether the Charity Commissioners have initiated a re-survey of the charities of England and Wales, or are making any inquiries with a view to compile a list of the existing charities, and, if so,
how is the necessary information being obtained, and especially in South Wilts.
THE PARLIAMENTARY CHARITY COMMISSIONER (Mr. GRIFFITH BOSCAWEN, Kent, Tunbridge): Since 1890 reports upon the charities of the following counties of England and Wales have been completed: Anglesey, Carnarvon, Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth, Carmarthen, Glamorgan, Yorks, W. R., London (exclusive of the City of London). Inquiries are being conducted into the charities in the following counties: Montgomery, Durham, Lancashire, and Wilts and in the City of London. The information in each case is obtained by an inquiry on the spot, and an examination of documents by an Assistant Commissioner, and such an inquiry by Mr. Cardew is proceeding in Wiltshire.
EARL OF KENMARE AND POLICE PROTECTION.
MR. MURPHY (Kerry, E.): I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether he is aware that a member of the Irish police force has been constantly engaged at Killarney House, the Earl of Kenmare's residence, for a number of years past, and that this policeman always appears in civilian dress, and is mostly engaged in attending the flower beds around the house, and other similar duties; whether he can state the sum paid in salary and allowances to this constable during the years he has been at Killarney House; and whether he will give instructions to have this policeman withdrawn for the performance of other duties, in view of the crimelessness of the district.
THE CHIEF SECRETARY FOR IRELAND (Mr. WYNDHAM, Dover): There is no foundation for the statement that the constable employed on the duty of affording protection at the residence of Lord Kenmare is or has been engaged in the manner alleged. The constable has been paid at the ordinary rates, and his employment entails no charge on the district or county. The question of the necessity of continuing this special protection is one for determination by the local responsible officers, with whose discretion I cannot interfere.
MR. FLAVIN: What is the necessity for the protection of Lord Kenmare?
MR. SPEAKER: The hon. Member must not enter on arguments.
HERBERT ESTATE (KERRY) CONFERENCE
MR. MURPHY: I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether he can explain the sending of two policemen on bicycles from Beaufort, county Kerry, to Lahard, county Kerry, to attend a conference of tenants on the Herbert Estate recently, which conference was held to discuss the question of purchasing the sporting rights of their farms.
MR. WYNDHAM: No directions were given to the police to be present at this conference. They attended on their own initiative.
CORK DAIRY INDUSTRY.
MR. WILLIAM ABRAHAM (Cork County, N. E.): I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether he is now in a position to state the decision arrived at by the Agriculture and Technical Instruction Board with regard to improving the dairy industry in county Cork and other counties by making advances to farmers, in the form of loans, for the purpose of assisting them to purchase hand-separators.
MR. WYNDHAM: The Vice-President of the Department fully explained at the recent meeting of the Agricultural Council the objections to making loans to individuals for purposes such as those suggested in the question. If, however, with or without the assistance of a local authority, associations of farmers approach the Department with any scheme of agricultural loans embodying satisfactory security and provision for punctual repayment, Such scheme will be duly considered.
IRISH LUNACY ADMINISTRATION.
MR. KENNEDY (Westmeath, N.): I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether the council of a county which, with one or
more other counties, forms a lunatic asylum district may, in the absence of consent or co-operation on the part of the councils of such counties, avail itself of Section 76 of the Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898, to provide within its own jurisdiction an auxiliary lunatic asylum for the reception of chronic lunatics, not dangerous to themselves or others, and who are now, or may be, chargeable to that county, whether as inmates of workhouses or of the district lunatic asylum; and whether such an auxiliary lunatic asylum would be managed by the council of the county establishing it independently of the joint committee of the lunatic asylum district comprising that county.
MR. WYNDHAM: The Government has been advised that the council of one of the counties comprising an asylum district could not avail itself of the provisions of Section 76 of the Act of 1898, in the absence of the consent and co-operation of the other counties comprised in the district.
GUN LICENCES IN COUNTY MAYO.
DR. AMBROSE (Mayo, W.): I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether he can state on what grounds a gun licence was refused to Patrick Masterson, of Doneagee, Achill Sound, County Mayo, seeing that Masterson, in his application, stated that he was a bootmaker, and required the gun for the purpose of killing seals, out of whose skins he could make slippers, which would be a source of income to him, and also that he was a landholder, and required the gun for the purpose of killing crows and other birds which were injurious to his crops.
MR. WYNDHAM: In rejecting this man's application for a gun licence the licensing officer acted in the exercise of the discretion vested in him by law. It would be contrary to practice to disclose the reasons upon which this decision was based.
MALLARANNY CATTLE MARKET.
DR. AMBROSE: I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether he is aware that Mr. R. Stoney, of Rosturk Castle, County
Mayo, collects tolls and customs in the village of Mallaranny, County Mayo, and that there is no weighing machine in the village; can he state whether Mr. Stoney is entitled to collect tolls and customs, and, if so, whether he is bound to provide a weighing machine.
MR. WYNDHAM: The reply to the first paragraph is in the affirmative. Mr. Stoney is entitled, I am informed, to collect tolls for cattle at this market. By an Order made under Section 2 of the Markets and Fairs Act of 1891 the market authority is exempted for a period of three years, from the 1st October last, from the necessity of providing a weighing machine at Mallaranny.
NEWPORT (COUNTY MAYO) POLICE.
DR. AMBROSE: I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland whether he can state how many policemen are stationed at Newport, county Mayo; how many of them are Roman Catholics; what is the religion of the district inspector, and also of the resident magistrate of the district.
MR. WYNDHAM: The answers to the first two queries are thirteen and eleven. The district inspector is a Protestant, as also is the resident magistrate who attends Newport Petty Sessions. The resident magistrate who attends the other sessions in the district is a Roman Catholic.
TULLAMORE QUARTER SESSIONS JUDGE.
MR. REDDY (King's County, Birr): I beg to ask the Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland if his attention has been directed to the proceedings in connection with a case of alleged larceny at the last Tullamore Quarter Sessions, in which County Court Judge Curran discharged the jury without permitting them to consider their verdict, and fined one of them £;10, sending the prisoner to trial at the assizes; and, seeing that this juror had merely called attention to the lack of direct evidence, and that thereupon the county court judge commented adversely on his remarks, and inflicted the fine, without giving an opportunity of explanation, whether he
will have an inquiry made into this matter with the view to having this fine remitted.
MR. WYNDHAM: I have no right to call upon the judge to explain how he performed his dutes. I may, however, mention that no fine whatever was imposed on any juror, and the prisoner was not sent for trial to the assizes; on the contrary, his trial was adjourned to the next quarter sessions, and he himself was admitted to bail.
MR. REDDY: I was in court when the juryman was fined, so I was not misinformed.
LIMERICK RURAL POSTMAN'S GRIEVANCES.
MR. O'SHAUGHNESSY (Limerick, W.): I beg to ask the Secretary to the Treasury, as representing the Postmaster General, if he can state why, on the changing of the route of Thomas Liston, rural postman in the districts of Kilmihill, Ballynoe, and Ballyneale, in the county of Limerick, in May, 1900, his usual weekly salary was reduced from 12s. 6d. to 8s. 6d. for no breach of discipline or lack of duty; is he aware that the mileage has not been decreased by the change, but that additional work is the outcome, a house to house collection being now made; that owing to this change Liston was unable to attend Divine worship in Ballingarry on Sundays; and that, on investigation by the officials after a period of ten months, a helper was appointed on Sundays, but Liston's weekly salary still further reduced, and whether this man will be compensated for the reduction in his salary after seven years of service.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: It is the fact, as stated by the hon. Member, that on the revision of Thomas Liston's duty last year his pay was reduced. Under the re-arrangement Liston's walk was extended, but his hours of duty were curtailed, as he now reaches home shortly after 10 a.m. instead of at 7.40 p.m. as formerly. The pay was, however, fixed somewhat below scale, and instructions have now been given for paying him the balance at the scale rate from the date of the alteration. A further extension of the duty has now been authorised,
and in future the pay will be 2s. 6d. a week higher than it is at present. With regard to the Sunday delivery, it is the case that to enable the man to attend Divine service the duty has been reduced, but it has now been decided to maintain the former payment for Sunday work.
MR. O'SHAUGHNESSY: Will the man's wages be raised to the old scale?
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: No, Sir.
COMMITTEE ON WAR OFFICE ORGANI- SATION;DISCUSSION OF REPORT.
CAPTAIN NORTON (Newington, W.): I beg to ask the First Lord of the Treasury whether, seeing the importance of the recently published Report upon the War Office, coupled with the fact that its publication immediately followed the passage of the Vote upon which it might have been discussed, he will say whether any opportunity will be afforded of considering the Report during the present session.
THE FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY (Mr. A. J. BALFOUR, Manchester, E.): I am afraid I can give no pledge to the hon. Gentleman as to placing any time at the disposal of the House for the discussion of this Report.
*MR. MATHER (Lancashire, Rossendale): As a member of the War Office Organisation Committee may I ask whether, having regard to the instruction given by the Secretary of State for War when it entered on its inquiry that the subject was one of great importance and great urgency, the right hon. Gentleman will make some arrangement for the Report to be discussed in the House of Commons, provided it is necessary that such a course should be adopted, before the Secretary of State puts the scheme embodied in the Report into operation.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I agree that it would be a very unfortunate thing if the absence of discussion in this House were to hamper the Secretary of State in acting upon the Report, but that I can assure him is not the case. My right hon. friend is considering the Report at
present, and I conceive he would not delay any action he thought fit to take on the ground that the Report had not been discussed in this House.
CAPTAIN NORTON: May I ask the right hon. Gentleman whether, seeing that the Report will change the entire military system of the country, he will not consider it advisable to give the House one day other than the days allotted to Supply for the consideration of this question.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I do not agree with the hon. Gentleman that the Report suggests an entire reconstruction of the British Army.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON LOCAL TAXATION;REPORT.
SIR HENRY FOWLER (Wolverhampton, E.): I beg to ask the First Lord of the Treasury when the Report of the Royal Commission on Local Taxation will be presented.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I believe the Report is in the hands of the printer, and I hope it will be issued to the public in the course of next week.
BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE.
MR. LOUGH: Is it the intention of the Government to take the Loan Bill to-night, No. 19 on the Paper? And will the right hon. Gentleman consent to take Report of the Post Office Vote at a time which will allow of a little further discussion, in view of the inadequate debate we had on Friday on a question which excites such general interest?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I had hoped that it would be possible to take the Loan Bill, but inquiry shows it will not. As to the second question, I think I may venture to point out respectfully to the House that in proportion to its interest we have already discussed this Vote quite adequately, and I do not see how I can in any way meet the desire which the hon. Gentleman has expressed. Perhaps, as I am on my legs, I may explain to the House that I do not propose to move my motion to-morrow precisely in the form in which it appears on the Paper to-day. As it now stands I propose to
except the three next Wednesdays from its operation. I propose to give the 26th instant to the discussion of private Members' Bills, but I do not propose to leave it altogether in the hands of hon. Members. I think the Government should retain the power of controlling the order of business on that day, and my resolution will be altered accordingly.
MR. JAMES LOWTHER (Kent, Thanet): What will be the other business to-morrow?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: The Factories Bill.
MR. GODDARD (Ipswich): What will be the Supply taken on Friday?
MR. A. J. BALFOUR: I will give that information to-morrow. Probably we shall devote Thursday as well as Friday to Supply.
WAYS AND MEANS.
Considered in Committee.
(In the Committee.)
[Mr. J. W. LOWTHER (Cumberland, Penrith) in the Chair.]
MOLASSES AND GLUCOSE.
*THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER (Sir M. HICKS BEACH, Bristol, W.): The Committee will remember that in the Budget resolutions as now embodied in the Finance Bill it was proposed to impose a duty of 2s. per cwt. on molasses and all sugar and extracts from sugar that cannot be tested by the polariscope, and 1s. 8d. per cwt. on glucose. Well, since those resolutions were passed we have been able, of course, to investigate the nature and quality of the articles comprised under those two heads much more exhaustively than was possible before the resolutions were proposed; and I am quite satisfied that the duties imposed by these resolutions on molasses and glucose were not sufficient to guard the sugar revenue, and were not fair to manufacturers here with reference to certain kinds of molasses and glucose, while, on the other hand, they were too high with regard to unexhausted molasses. Among the extracts of sugar which are classed together with molasses in the Bill as it now stands are invert sugar and
other kinds of extracts which contain as much as 80 per cent., I think, of sweetening matter, and which are not at all by-products of raw sugar, as are molasses, but are obtained from raw sugar of a high quality, polarising at from 90 deg. to 93 deg., which would itself pay a duty of 3s. 1d. to 3s. 2d. Therefore it is clear, I think, that to impose a duty of not more than 2s. a cwt. upon articles of that class would result in a very considerable loss to the Revenue, and would also place the foreign producer of such articles in a position of preference to the extent of something like 9d. per cwt., as compared with the manufacturer of such articles here. On the other hand, there is a kind of molasses of very poor quality, largely exhausted in the process of manufacture, which contains a comparatively small amount of sweetening matter, and is used to the extent of 20,000 or 30,000 tons a year for cattle feeding, and also to some extent in the manufacture of blacking, dyes, and other articles. Two shillings per cwt. was too high a rate for any article of that sort. The matter has been brought under my notice from both Scotland and Liverpool, which are interested in these imports. Therefore, in place of the duty on molasses as now proposed in the Finance Bill, I propose that molasses and all sugar and extracts from sugar which cannot be tested by the polariscope, if containing 70 per cent. or more of sweetening matter, shall pay 2s. 9d. per cwt.; if containing less than 70 per cent. and more than 50 per cent. of sweetening matter, 2s. per cwt., as at present in the Bill. That relates, I think, to certain syrups which are largely consumed by the poorer classes. If containing not more than 50 per cent. of sweetening matter, 1s. per cwt. only.
With regard to glucose, also, it is necessary to make an alterations The duty of 1s. 8d. on glucose was based on the assumption that glucose contained about 40 per cent. of sweetening matter. We have ascertained that there are two kinds of glucose, one of which, the solid glucose, contains a very much larger amount of sweetening matter than that. It is largely used for brewing purposes, and it is equal in sweetening power to something like 80 per cent. of sugar; and, therefore, solid glucose ought to pay a corresponding duty of about. 2s. 9d.
Liquid glucose has a higher sweetening power than I supposed, varying from 45 to 55 per cent., and therefore I think the duty on that should be 2s. instead of 1s. 8d., as proposed in the Bill. I may say that we have had practical proof that the glucose duty as it now stands in the Finance Bill is insufficient to guard the sugar revenue, because, since the duty was enacted, it is a very remarkable fact that the import of glucose from abroad has been of a much higher sweetening power than that which was formerly sent into this country, so that it is perfectly obvious that it is competing unfairly in the market with sugar. I propose that these duties should commence from to-morrow, and that a similar Excise duty should be levied on molasses and glucose, to take effect also from to-morrow. When the duties on molasses and glucose were originally proposed, it was impossible to propose that the Excise duty should come into force on the same day as the Customs duty, because, as the Committee are aware, in order to levy an Excise duty it is necessary to make arrangements for the manner in which it shall be levied. This can only be done after careful communication with the manufacturers of the article on which the duty is to be levied. That could not take place before the introduction of the Budget; but the matter has now been entirely arranged, and the Inland Revenue authorities inform me that they are prepared to levy the Excise duty on glucose and molasses as from to-morrow, so that both the manufacturers here and abroad will be from that day placed on precisely the same footing. I trust the Committee will be willing to make these alterations in the resolutions, which are, of course, only preliminary to my proposing Amendments to the Finance Bill In order to carry them into effect.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That there shall be charged on and after the eleventh day of June nineteen hundred and one the following Customs duties:;
Molasses and all sugar and extracts from sugar which cannot be tested by the polariscope;
If containing 70 per cent. or more of sweetening matter the cwt.
s.
d.
2
9
If containing less than 70 per cent. and more than 50 per cent. of sweetening matter
the cwt.
2
0
If containing not more than 50 per cent. of sweetening matter
the cwt.
1
0
Glucose:
Solid
the cwt.
2
9
Liquid
the cwt.
2
0
And that there shall be charged on and after the same date on glucose Excise duties equivalent to the Customs duties charged on that article.";(Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer.)
MR. LOUGH (Islington, W.) said he thought the House ought to give a little attention to the action which was now being taken by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. To his mind the proposals of the Finance Bill had not received the consideration which they ought to have done. They were witnessing that afternoon what he might call the first scene in the new drama of Protection which had been set up in this country. They had a graduated scheme under which these new duties were established. It was a subtle scheme of Protection. The Chancellor of the Exchequer had told them that there was no opportunity before the Budget was introduced of inquiry as to the imposition of the Excise duty now proposed but he maintained that they were driven into the difficulties which had necessitated these alterations, because they had accepted the principle of a graduated duty. He believed that it was not until after the introduction of the Budget that the idea of an Excise duty cropped up. He saw no reason, if they were to have one, why it should not have been enforced ever since the 19th April.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: I have explained that it was impossible to arrange the details before.
MR. LOUGH said he desired to call attention to the inconvenience which had been inflicted on a very important trade for two or three months, and which he believed would fall upon the general public in consequence of the complicated system which it had taken the Treasury so long to incubate. He
would like to make an appeal to the leaders of the party to which he belonged to be warned by what was going on that afternoon, and to take a little more interest in the matter. He regretted exceedingly that there was no one on the Front Opposition Bench to say one word of protest against the system which the Chancellor of the Exchequer embodied in the Budget and which he had enlarged that evening. The right hon. Gentlemen the Members for East Wolverhampton, West Monmouth, East Fife, and Montrose Burghs had all given the sugar duty away. The one crumb of comfort he had got was that the right hon. Gentleman the Leader of the Opposition had not committed himself yet. That was the right hon. Gentleman's great virtue. He waited, with regard to these complicated matters, until he saw the whole plan of the Chancellor of the Exchequer unfolded. They had been told by the right hon. Gentleman the Member for East Wolverhampton that Mr. Gladstone and Sir George Cornewall Lewis had both imposed a sugar duty. But the circumstances were not altogether analogous. It was a terrible thing for this country, after twenty-five years of freedom from a duty of this nature, to have it reimposed, especially under the complicated conditions now suggested, conditions which, in view of the enormous consumption of the article taxed, must cause great inconvenience. Mr. Gladstone and Sir George Cornewall Lewis had not had to act after a period of twenty-five years freedom from the duty; they only varied it, in fact, and he therefore appealed to the Leader of the Opposition, who, as he had pointed out, had not yet committed himself, to closely watch the proceedings of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. There were great issues involved which must inevitably lead to considerable discussion.
MR. GIBSON BOWLES (Lynn Regis) said that, as he understood the Chancellor of the Exchequer's proposal, the effect was to put glucose on the same footing as sugar.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: Yes.
MR. GIBSON BOWLES said that, in that case, the right hon. Gentleman's
resolution was a very proper one. But it appeared to him that an element was being introduced as a subject of taxation which was not proposed to be taxed by the Finance Bill. That was sweetening matter. He would like to ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what he meant by sweetening matter, and how the amount of sweetening; matter was to be ascertained. He wished it to be understood that he was not complaining of the right hon. Gentleman's proposal.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH said that in the Finance Bill, as it now stood, under the head of "molasses" other articles were included in the words "and all sugar and extracts from sugar which cannot be tested by the polariscope." The polariscope could not be applied to these articles, and they were grouped together as one thing, so that a certain duty might be levied upon them. It had been discovered that they varied very much in their sweetening matter, and obviously it was necessary to make a difference between them in order to protect the sugar revenue.
MR. DILLON (Mayo, E.) said the Chancellor of the Exchequer had now proposed a radical change in the resolution which was formerly brought forward. He had announced that if the Bill were passed in the shape in which it was drafted, they would be unwittingly putting on a large protective duty with regard to glucose and certain forms of molasses. That was a very good illustration of the effect of putting a tax on an article which entered largely into the manufactures of the country. If, when the Government brought in the Bill, the two or three Members on the Opposition side of the House who had taken an interest in the question had brought Forward the theory which the Chancellor of the Exchequer now stated, they would have been laughed at. If the Chancellor of the Exchequer had not made this proposal now the result would have been that a protective measure would have been passed without perhaps more than ten Members knowing what was being done. The Chancellor of the Exchequer told them now that the resolution would prevent this being a protective measure.
How were they to know that? They had simply the Chancellor of the Exchequer's statement. How many members of the Committee were in a position to say that they understood what was meant by Copeland's test, by which it was proposed to ascertain the amount of sweetening matter in sugar and molasses? They were going blindly in this matter on the word of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who admitted that he did not understand the subject. Unless the right hon. Gentleman was able to give a fuller explanation of the method by which the sweetening power of those various substances was to be tested, it was preposterous to ask the House of Commons to pass a measure which might be a protective measure. The Chancellor of the Exchequer had at this stage introduced for the first time the expression "sweetening matter." What was sweetening matter? The Committee had received no definition. It was not sugar, and if the right hon. Gentleman meant the power of certain articles to impart sweetness, then he ought to draw a distinction between beetroot sugar and cane sugar. Cane sugar had greater sweetening power than an equal quantity of beetroot sugar. The Chancellor of the Exchequer had drafted and introduced the Finance Bill in blank ignorance as to the relative sweetening powers of liquid and solid glucose. What difficulty was there in getting that information as to the difference earlier from the chemists or experts on whose advice he relied? He must have had at his command confidential men at Somerset House, who could have told him the difference between liquid and solid glucose. The hon. Member did not see the slightest ground for the position taken up now by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, seeing that he was in a position to make inquiry and to get the information before he introduced the resolution. Surely it was not beyond the ingenuity of modern chemists to liquefy solid glucose, and if that were done the whole structure of the new financial resolution would be knocked on the head. He thought it was the most extraordinary doctrine ever introduced in the House of Commons that a most complicated financial provision
should be based on the assumption that the present relations between the sweetening powers of solid and liquid glucose would remain unchanged. This was only a proof of the vicious character of the tax. An extraordinary revolution was being introduced in the financial system of the country. He had watched with amazement the docility with which the House of Commons had accepted this extraordinary change. It was a tax, in his opinion, which combined in itself every possible objection to a tax. It was a tax on an essential and most valuable article of the food of the people. Already the price of blacking and biscuits had been raised. He was informed that Huntley and Palmer had raised the price of their biscuits, and even of those which contained no sugar at all. [Laughter.] Hon. Members laughed, but that was a fact. Peek, Frean, and Company had sent out a circular stating that they had been compelled to raise the price of all their biscuits without reference to the question whether they contained sugar or not. The tax would be very costly to levy, and it would be impossible, at least for several years, to be quite certain whether or not it was discriminating against the manufacturers of this country and in favour of manufacturers abroad. It was a tax which sinned against all the great canons by which the financiers of the last fifty years had been guided in bringing the finance of this country to a state of perfection which had made it the envy of every expert throughout the world. On these grounds he would resist the tax at every possible stage.
MR. CHAPLIN (Lincolnshire, Sleaford) said the hon. Member for East Mayo had charged the Chancellor of the Exchequer with desiring to impose a graded duty on sugar. It appeared to him that the object of the Chancellor of the Exchequer was to place glucose and sugar of different qualities upon an entirely equal footing so far as he could. It was impossible for obvious reasons that the Chancellor of the Exchequer should make exhaustive inquiries into this subject before bringing forward the proposal. If, of course, the right hon. Gentleman had made such inquiries everybody would have known what one of the principal
features of the Budget was to be before the time came for explaining it. The hon. Member for East Mayo complained that he did not understand all the details of the chemical tests on this question. How many Members would be able to understand them unless they had some special chemical education? The Chancellor of the Exchequer had at his command the advice of able and experienced experts, and he had taken their opinion. It was no doubt on their advice that the changes he now proposed were made. The hon. Member for East Mayo wanted to know how many Members of the House of Commons had even the beginnings of an understanding of the question, and went on to say that he did not believe half a dozen did. He thought the hon. Member was perfectly right, and that the hon. Member himself could not be included in the number. The inference he drew from the statement was, what a blessing it would be if a few Members could recognise their want of information on certain subjects, and that they were not qualified, although ready, to talk on all possible occasions. After all, the speech of the hon. Member was an attack more than anything else on the sugar duty branch of the Budget; but whether it was right or wrong to impose a duty on sugar, at any rate that duty had already been agreed to by the House.
SIR H. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN (Stirling Burghs): The objects proposed by the right hon. Gentleman are of an exceedingly technical and complicated character, and he will not expect, I am sure, the ordinary Member of Parliament to be able either to follow exactly what he said or to appreciate the rights and the wrongs of any question which might be raised in the matter. All I can say is that it will be the duty of us all to get such information as we can as to the general effect of the duty which the right hon. Gentleman proposes, which seems to me, roughly speaking, in the direction of that equal treatment of these different commodities which certainly ought to be the object which we should seek to obtain. I think that some of us should look at the question very closely, not from the general point of view of the
sugar duty, which is hardly before the Committee to-day, but from the point of view of the effect of its details upon Protection, and the consequences that may follow to different branches of the trade of this country from the duties that are proposed. Now, there is one matter to which my attention has been called, and which, as represented to me, seems highly deserving of attention, namely, the duty charged upon the sugar in canned fruits. The duty has been, I believe, imposed on the sugar in canned fruits far exceeding the proportion of duty that ought to have fallen upon it, and in that way a considerable industry is injuriously affected and a protective effect is created, and it will lead, no doubt, to a considerable increase in the price to the consumer in this country. In a matter so diffused as this, the use of sugar in manufactures, where there are so many developments of industry and ingenuity in the employment of sugar in various commodities, I think we may be sure that there will be cases of this sort which will require the attention of the Committee. I do not know whether the right hon. Gentleman's attention has been particularly called to the point to which I refer, nor do I know that it would require to be dealt with in Committee, but I hope he will be able to give a satisfactory explanation of the circumstance to which I have referred. For the present moment, I think we are hardly in a position to say "Aye" or "No" to the detailed changes which the right hon. Gentleman has intimated to us, but it will be our duty to press inquiry before we get out of Committee on the Finance Bill.
SIR MARK STEWART (Kirkcudbrightshire) said that, however much the proposal of the right hon. Gentleman the Chancellor of the Exchequer might be criticised from a hostile point of view by hon. Gentlemen opposite, it would meet with great acceptance from agriculturists generally. He spoke with some knowledge on this subject. He had been somewhat startled by the fact that by the first resolution brought into the House the tax on molasses would have amounted to 2s. a cwt., or 12s. a barrel, which seemed to him a particularly heavy tax on a valuable cattle food.
He, however, did not intend to enlarge on the topic, but he simply wished to thank his right hon. friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer for looking into this matter, and bringing this new resolution before the House.
MR. E. J. C. MORTON (Devonport) said he could not avoid protesting against what he regarded as the utter unsound ness of the whole financial scheme of the present Government, and he would take every opportunity of pro testing against each detail of it. They knew that the Chancellor of the Ex chequer had consistently asserted that the proposals in regard to the sugar duty were not protective. As a matter of fact, whether the tax on molasses as originally introduced was or was not protective, it could not be denied that the right hon. Gentleman was now proposing to introduce a graduated tax on molasses; in fact, the right hon. Gentleman was now proposing three taxes for one. He was perfectly well aware that, technically speaking, the proposal of the Chancellor of the Exchequer could not be described as protective, simply because the right hon. Gentleman proposed to put on an Excise duty corresponding to the Customs duties. But he maintained that the evils which would result from these proposals were similar to the evils arising from protection pure and simple. He would point out that during the last twenty-four or twenty-six years sugar had not only become a staple article of the food of the people, but the raw material on which several small trades had been founded. Therefore to tax the raw material of these trades was to produce the very evils of which they complained from a purely protective tax. He would point out that foreign countries which gave bounties on the exports of sugar made a pure present to this country of so much sugar, and it was owing to that present that these small industries had been started. These small industries depended for their prosperity essentially on the cheapness of sugar, and that cheapness of sugar again depended on the sugar being admitted duty free. Take, for instance, the jam trade, which now employed five times the number of people that had been employed by all the sugar refineries in the country. More-
over, we were able to make a profit out of the very foreign countries who made us a present of this sugar through their export bounties, and we were exporting large quantities of jam abroad.
*THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order&#x0021; All that the hon. Gentleman can discuss on this resolution is the variation caused by the proposed changes in the duties on sugar substitutes and molasses.
MR. E. J. C. MORTON said he would endeavour not to transgress the Chairman's ruling. He would put his point in a slightly different way. The Chancellor of the Exchequer's proposal, he maintained, would still further increase the price of sugar, and thereby produce an increased evil of the character he had indicated;an evil which existed to a small extent in the original proposals of the Budget. He would like, if he might, inasmuch as the question had been mentioned in debate, to refer to the assertion of the right hon. Gentleman the Member for East Wolverhampton and the right hon. Gentleman the Chancellor of the Exchequer that they claimed the authority of Mr. Gladstone in regard to an increased tax on sugar.
*THE CHAIRMAN: No authority was claimed in regard to the increase of the tax on sugar, but in regard to the imposition of a tax on sugar. The hon. Member is now trying to get round the ruling I have given.
MR. E. J. C. MORTON said he was under the impression that the analogy was that Mr. Gladstone had increased the tax on sugar, not that he had imposed it. But he would leave that point, and only remark in conclusion that he trusted the leaders on that side of the House would endeavour to rid themselves of one particular attitude of mind in regard to the proposal of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that there were those who supported the sugar tax as bad finance merely because bad finance would punish those who took a different view from them in regard to the war.
*MR. CHARLES McARTHUR (Liverpool, Exchange) said he was glad that the Chancellor of the Exchequer had
intimated his intention of reducing the duty on the lower class of molasses. Treacle was largely imported for making feeding cakes for cattle, and if the duty on that treacle had been left at the very high figure in the original Budget resolution it would have practically stopped the trade and been detrimental to agriculture. He would have liked to have seen molasses not used for human food exempted from the duty altogether; but as that was impossible he thanked the Chancellor of the Exchequer for making the reduction he had done.
MR. KEARLEY (Devonport) said that the Chancellor of the Exchequer had been very slow to convince as to the necessity of maintaining this tax on glucose. The right hon. Gentleman had disregarded the information brought to his notice in the House; and it seemed extraordinary that there should not have been some inquiry on his part as to the incidence of the duty. He should like to point out to the right hon. Gentleman that his proposal would not fully meet the case in regard to glucose. He was perfectly certain that unless the right hon. Gentleman imposed the full sugar duty on glucose it would lead to the Chancellor of the Exchequer being defrauded by foreign firms, and most assuredly it would lead to the consumer being defrauded. He would give proof of what he had stated. In the first place, the brewer would always show a great preference for the cheap article. Now that there was a differentiation between the duties on sugar and glucose he would show a greater preference than ever for the cheaper and less desirable article. But it must not be forgotten that the brewer paid a beer duty on the specific gravity of the liquid, that was to say, on the wort; and the specific gravity of the liquid produced from glucose and the specific gravity of the liquid produced from sugar was exactly the same. The result would inevitably be that we should have beer less pure than before; it would be a glucose beverage altogether; and the Chancellor of the Exchequer would not receive from the brewer the amount of taxation to which he was justly entitled. The Conservative party had always been regarded as the friends of "the trade" as it was called, and in re-arranging
the burden the Chancellor of the Exchequer should consider the differentiation between the duties on sugar and glucose. What was the effect on the consumer? When the consumer purchased an article containing sugar he expected to get pure sugar, but the result of the differentiation between the duties on glucose and sugar would be that the manufacturer would displace pure sugar and put in this impure article that was already rapidly taking place, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer was encouraging this. The right hon. Gentleman showed a lamentable lack of knowledge in this matter. He admitted that glucose was largely used, and when questions were put to him as to whether it was or was not adulteration, he said he did not appear to know much about it.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: I said it was illegal.
MR. KEARLEY said the right hon. Gentleman said it had been appealed against, but he did not appear to know that the judgment of the court of first instance had been upheld on that appeal. We did not want to be in a state of glucose saturation; we had to drink glucose beer; we did not want glucose in everything. He strongly urged that the duty on glucose should be put up to a level with the highest sugar duty, and he hoped the Chancellor of the Exchequer would give some consideration to that matter in his reply.
MR. GODDARD (Ipswich) said he did not understand from the speech of the Chancellor of the Exchequer what would be the result of this change in the duty so far as the Exchequer was concerned, or what would be the result so far as the revenue was concerned. When he replied the Chancellor of the Exchequer would perhaps give some consideration to that point.
*MR. TAYLOR (Lancashire, Radcliffe) said the very fact that the Chancellor of the Exchequer proposed to increased one tax by over 60 per cent. and to reduce another by 50 per cent. was a lesson to the House as to the difficulties and dangers of meddling with subjects with which, not only the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, but certainly the House at large were not qualified to deal. He did not for a moment believe that the Chancellor of the Exchequer meant to do any harm to the commercial interests of the country; but the fact that within two months of the passing of taxes of this importance it was found necessary to impose such a great change should be a warning to the House not to embark in this particular form of taxation.
*MR. STEVENSON (Suffolk, Eye) disclaimed any desire to embark upon a discussion of the taxation of molasses, which was a technical subject with which he was not prepared to deal. No doubt the reduction of the tax upon molasses would by some be considered a boon to the agricultural classes, but he considered if it were it was of a very qualified nature, as the particular kind of molasses affected made more fat than meat, when used as feeding stuffs. With regard to glucose and other sweetening substances akin to sugar, they should not pay a less duty than sugar, and the only question was whether this particular rise in the duty of glucose was calculated to meet that object. If a particular tax was imposed upon sugar a tax, at least equal in amount, ought to be imposed on articles of food akin to sugar. Whether such a thing would be done by this tax was extremely doubtful. He trusted that when this matter was more fully considered in Committee the Chancellor of the Exchequer would be open to conviction and amenable to such suggestions as were offered, and that he would see his way to mete out to glucose and other substances used in place of sugar the same treatment as he meted out to sugar itself.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: It is my desire that, so far as the sweetening powers of sugar on one side and of glucose on the other are concerned, the duty should be equal. But my mind is absolutely open with regard to the further discuss on of the matter in Committee. I have made this proposal to the Committee, which, despite the remarks of the hon. Member for Devonport, is a very large increase in the duty on glucose, in the belief that practically sugar and solid glucose will be put on an equality.
As to the effect of the changes on the revenue, the duty is increased to a large extent on solid glucose, and to a lesser extent on liquid glucose, but with regard to a very considerable part of molasses and other kinds of sugar the duty is largely lowered, and though I should think that on the whole there will be some increase on the total yield of the duties on molasses and glucose, I do not, think it will be a very large one.
Question put, and agreed to.
Resolution to be reported to-morrow; Committee to sit again upon Wednesday.
CIVIL LIST BILL.
Considered in Committee.
(In the Committee.)
[Mr. J. W. LOWTHER (Cumberland, Penrith) in the Chair.]
Clause 1:;
MR. LABOUCHERE (Northampton) said the intention of the Amendment he desired to move was to deal with the question of whether the hereditary revenues derived from the Crown lands and other sources really belonged to the King in his personal capacity or in his capacity of head of the State. In the preamble of the Bill the House was told that these had been given up by the King, but the preamble of a Bill did not make law, and the fact that in the preamble he gave them up did not give the King, in his personal capacity, any title to these hereditary revenues. He believed that no lawyer would venture to assert that these hereditary revenues belonged personally to the sovereign, except as the head and representative of the State. In 1872 a Report was made by the Treasury upon divers matters connected with finance, and in an exhaustive appendix to that Report the whole question of the hereditary revenues was treated;whence they were derived and to whom they belonged; and no one, he submitted, could read that official document without coming to the conclusion that the whole idea of the hereditary revenues belonging to the sovereign was about as much a myth as any telegram
of Reuter's from the seat of war. Up to 1688 there was no such thing as a Civil List at all. Up to then the hereditary revenues belonged entirely to the State, and were devoted to the government of the State, and no distinction was made as to what the monarch was to spend on his family. What was now called the Civil List came into existence at the time of William and Mary, when the funds were voted and certain sources were reserved from which money was to be derived; but there was no pretence that they belonged to the sovereign in any way, and the House of Commons had a right to vote or refuse them as it chose. In the reign of Anne certain revenues were charged, but even then there was no idea that they in any way belonged to the sovereign. It was acknowledged then that they belonged to the country, and portions of them were taken and devoted to special purposes. In the reigns of George I. and George II. the same rule applied. In the reign of George III. the arrangement was much the same; but it was in that reign that in the preamble of the Act the King said he gave up the hereditary revenues from Crown lands, etc., and the same renunciation was performed in the preambles of the Acts of George IV., William IV., and Victoria. But could any lawyer say, after the facts which had been set forth by the official Report of 1872, that there was any right in the sovereign to hold these revenues as his own property? Such a right was not derived before the Revolution of 1688, and it was certainly not derived afterwards. The only reason the remuneration was put into the preambles of the Acts of George I., George II., and George III. was that, although those sovereigns had recognised that the larger hereditary revenues belonged to the State, they had not so recognised the smaller ones. This was considered unfair, and therefore it was specially inserted in the Civil List of William IV. that these smaller revenues, as well as the hereditary revenues, were given up. The Crown had absolutely no title to the Crown lands, or to any other hereditary revenues. The mistake had crept in apparently owing to the action of Lord Bute. If it were merely the old-fashioned mode of showing respect to the Crown, he should not have
protested against it, but it was more than that. The Chancellor of the Exchequer himself had said that as a consideration for the House granting the Civil List, the Crown had given up this personal property. But that point was not taken into consideration at all. In granting the Civil List, no account was taken of the relation it would bear to the amount the Crown lands brought in, but a sum was granted which the House thought fitting to the dignity and the maintenance of the Crown. He therefore protested against this statement being dragged into one Civil List after another. There ought always to be a protest raised against it. The principle should be kept alive that the sovereign should have no personal estates, and that so far as the Crown lands, etc., were concerned the sovereign owned no personal property. He therefore moved the Amendment standing in his name.
Amendment proposed;
"In page 1, line 25, to leave out from the word 'revenues' to the word 'shall,' in page 2, line 1.";(Mr Labouchere.)
Question proposed, "That the words proposed to be left out stand part of the clause."
THE FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY (Mr. A. J. BALFOUR, Manchester, E.): The hon. Gentleman has given us a very learned and interesting disquisition upon the history of Crown lands, but I confess I cannot for the life of me see how his premisses lead to his conclusions, or what benefit he desires to gain for his Amendment. The hon. Member says that there is no doubt the Crown lands do not belong to the Crown. I should say there is no doubt that the Crown lands do belong to the Crown, and every lawyer in the House, I suppose, would confirm that statement. The Crown lands belong to the Crown, and the sovereign could, if he had not made renunciation like that contained in this Bill, spend the money precisely as he chose. It may be perfectly true that in the days when there was no Civil List, in the more primitive days of British Monarchy, the Crown lands not only defrayed the cost of the sovereign's household and personal expenses, but a
large part of the expenses of running the government of the country. But no lawyer would say, in the absence of a renunciation by the Crown, that it would not be in the power of the Crown to spend the revenues of the Crown lands according to the will of the sovereign for the time being. Under these circumstances I cannot see what would be gained by the Amendment of the hon. Gentleman. It is in the highest degree improbable that the time will ever arrive when a sovereign of this country would
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir A. F.
Colomb, Sir John Charles Ready
Haldane, Richard Bourdon
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Hall, Edward Marshall
Aird, Sir John
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Hamilton, Rt. Hn. Ld G. (Midd'x
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Craig, Robert Hunter
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Allsopp, Hon George
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir Wm.
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Crombie, John William
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd.
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Asquith, Rt. Hn Herbert Henry
Dalkeith, Earl of
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Austin, Sir John
Davies, Sir H. D. (Chatham)
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Davies, M. Vaughan-Cardigan
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir A. D.
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Denny, Colonel
Heaton, John Henniker
Baldwin, Alfred
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.)
Helder, Augustus
Balfour, Rt. Hn. A. J. (Manch'r)
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Hermon-Hodge, Robert T.
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Dixon-Hartland Sir Fred Dixon
Higginbottom, S. W.
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Doughty, George
Hill, Arthur
Banbury, Frederick George
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Holland, William Henry
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Duncan, J. Hastings
Hope, J. F. (Sheffi'ld, Brightside-
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Dunn, Sir William
Horner, Frederick William
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Dyke, Rt. Hon. Sir Wm. H.
Horniman, Frederick John
Bill, Charles
Edwards, Frank
Houldsworth, Sir W. H.
Black, Alexander William
Elliot, Hon. A. Ralph Douglas
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham)
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Emmott, Alfred
Hozier, Hon. J. Henry Cecil
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Fardell, Sir T. George
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Bousfield, William Robert
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Bowles, Capt. H. T. (Middlesex)
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edw.
Jacoby, James Alfred
Bowles, T. Gibson (King's Lynn
Fenwick, Charles
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Brassey, Albert
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Jessel, Capt. Herbert Merton
Broadhurst, Henry
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex.)
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Finch, George H.
Joicey, Sir James
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Jones, William (Carnanvonsh.
Brown, Alexander H. (Shropsh.
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Kay-Shuttleworth, Rt Hn Sir U.
Bryce, Rt. Hon. James
Fisher, William Hayes
Kearley, Hudson E.
Brymer, William Ernest
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H.
Burt, Thomas
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward A.
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Buxton, Sydney Charles
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop.
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J A (Glasgow
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Kimber, Henry
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H.
Flower, Ernest
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Fowler, Rt. Hn. Sir Henry
Kinloch, Sir John George S.
Cautley, Henry Strother
Garfit, William
Kitson, Sir James
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Gladstone, Rt. Hn. Herb. John
Knowles, Lees
Cavendish, V. C W (Derbyshire)
Gordon, Hn. J. E (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Gore, Hn. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.
Langley, Batty
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John E.
Laurie, Lt.-General
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J. (Birm
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth)
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Lawrence, Wm, F. (Liverpool)
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Graham, Henry Robert
Lawson, John Grant
Chapman, Edward
Grant, Corrie
Lecky, Rt. Hon. Wm. Edw. H.
Charrington, Spencer
Green, W. D. (Wednesbury)
Lee, Arthur H (Hants., Fareh'm
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Lees, Sir Elliott (Birkenhead)
Cochrane, Hon. Thos H. A. E.
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Leese, Sir Joseph F (Accrington)
Coddington, Sir William
Groves, James Grimble
Leigh Bennett, Henry Gurrie-
Cohen, Benjamin Louis
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Levy, Maurice
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Hain, Edward
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
refuse to come to terms about the arrangements for keeping up the Monarchy; and, in the meanwhile, the evidence afforded by the past reign shows that the present arrangement is highly satisfactory, and I think that in the present reign it would be in the highest degree foolish for the House to disturb that arrangement.
Question put.
The Committee divided: Ayes, 309; Noes, 67. (Division List No 230.)
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Percy, Earl
Spencer, Rt Hn C R (Northants.)
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S
Perks, Robert William
Stanley, Edward J. (Somerset)
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Philipps, John Wynford
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Lowe, Francis William
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Stevenson, Francis S.
Lowther, C. (Cum., Eskdale)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Lowther, Rt. Hn. James (Kent)
Plummer, Walter R.
Stirling-Maxwell, Sir John M.
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Strachey, Edward
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Pretyman, Ernest George
Stroyan, John
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Price, Robert John
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Macdona, John Cumming
Purvis, Robert
Tennant, Harold John
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Pym, C. Guy
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
M'Iver, Sir Lewis (Edinb'rgh, W
Quilter, Sir Cuthbert
Thomas, J A (Glamorgan, G'wer
Majendie, James A. H.
Randles, John S.
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Malcolm, Ian
Rankin, Sir James
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Manners, Lord Cecil
Rasch, Maj. Frederic Carne
Thornton, Percy M.
Maple, Sir John Blundell
Rea, Russell
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Markham, Arthur Basil
Reid, James (Greenock)
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Reid, Sir R. Threshie (Dumfries
Tuke, Sir John Batty
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Remnant, James Farquharson
Valentia, Viscount
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Vincent, Col. Sir C E H (Sheffield
Middlemore, John T.
Renwick, George
Wallace, Robert
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge)
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Wanklyn, James Leslie
Montagu, Hon. J. S. (Hants.)
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Morgan, Hn Fred. (Monm'thsh.
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan
Morley, Rt Hn John (Montrose)
Robinson, Brooke
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Robson, William Snowdon
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
Morrison, James Archibald
Roe, Sir Thomas
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Whiteley, George (York, W. R.)
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne)
Moss, Samuel
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Moulton, John Fletcher
Rothschild, Hn. Lionel Walter
Williams, Colonel R. (Dorset)
Mount, William Arthur
Russell, T. W.
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Wilson, A. Stanley (Yorks, E. R.
Muntz, Philip A.
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Wilson, Charles H. (Hull, W.)
Murray, Rt Hn A. Graham (Bute
Sassoon, Sir Edward Albert
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Murray, Chas. J. (Coventry)
Scott, Sir S. (Marylebone, W.)
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Seely, Charles H. (Lincoln)
Wodehouse, Rt. Hon E R (Bath)
Myers, William Henry
Seton-Karr, Henry
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'd
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Nicholson, William Graham
Shaw, Charles E. (Stafford)
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick B.)
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Norman, Henry
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Yoxall, James Henry
Palmer, George Wm. (Reading)
Sinclair, Capt. J. (Forfarshire)
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Parker, Gilbert
Smith, H C (Northumb. Tynesd.
Partington, Oswald
Smith, Jas. Parker (Lanarks)
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand)
Pease, Herb. Pike (Darlington)
Spear, John Ward
NOES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Ambrose, Robert
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South
Atherley-Jones, L.
Hammond, John
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Blake, Edward
Hardie, J. Keir (Merthyr Tydv'l
O'Brien, Kendal (T'pp'r'ry, Mid
Boland, John
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Burke, E. Haviland-
Hope, John Dean (Fife, West)
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Burns, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Caine, William Sproston
Leamy, Edmund
O'Connor, T. P. (Liverpool)
Caldwell, James
Leng, Sir John
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Lewis, John Herbert
O'Kelly, James (Rosc'mm'n, N.
Crean, Eugene
Lloyd-George, David
O'Malley, William
Cullinan, J.
Longh, Thomas
O'Mara, James
Delany, William
Lundon, W.
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Dilke, Rt. Hon. Sir Charles
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Power, Patrick Joseph
Dillon, John
Macnamara, Dr. Thomas J.
Reckitt, Harold James
Donelan, Capt. A.
M'Dermott, Patrick
Reddy, M.
Doogan, P. C.
M'Govern, T.
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Duffy, William J.
Mooney, John J.
Redmond, William (Clare)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Murnaghan, George
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Flynn, James Christopher
Murphy, John
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Gilhooly, James
Sullivan, Donal
Ure, Alexander
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Labouchere and Mr. M'Kenna.
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
Clause agreed to.
Clause 2:;
MR. LABOUCHERE said his next Amendment dealt with the amount of money proposed to be voted by Parliament for the King's Civil List. He proposed that the amount should be £;415,000 instead of £;470,000. Hon. Members did not realise that the funds of the Duchy of Lancaster formed part of the Civil List and brought it up to £;530,000. The late Queen Victoria was voted a Civil List of £;385,000 at a time when the revenue of the Duchy of Lancaster, instead of producing £;60,000 as at present, only produced £;12,000. Many years ago a Liberal Government proposed £;50,000 a year to the late Prince Consort, but the Conservatives at that time were so sound in certain matters connected with finance that, backed up by the Radicals in the House of Commons, the amount was reduced to £;30,000. It seemed to be thought by some gentleman to be a crime of lese majest&#x00E9;, when the Government proposed a sum of money either for the sovereign or a royal prince, to propose a reduction. He was prepared to vote whatever sum was actually required, but he was not ready, upon vague general observations such as were found in the Report of the majority of the Civil List Committee, to vote more than he thought was really necessary. The revenues of the Duchy of Lancaster had increased largely in recent years, and taking them at £;60,000, and including £;30,000 for the Prince Consort, which would have remained had he lived, the Civil List of Her Majesty would have been £;475,000 as against this £;530,000, which they were now called upon to vote. Although that Civil List was much smaller than the one proposed now, it amply sufficed for Her Majesty. A good deal was made upon the Committee of the fact that during the last few years Class III. of the present List exceeded the amount set down in the Civil List during the last five years of Her Majesty's reign by £;11,000. He thought the Chancellor of the Exchequer would admit that the expenses of His Majesty's
Household did not exceed the amount at which they stood at the commencement of the reign of Queen Victoria. The ceremonial expenditure in Class II. had been reduced. The amount for salaries had been reduced by doing away with sinecure offices to the extent of £;15,000, and the class had also been reduced £;6,000 by the abolition of the Royal Buckhounds. The pensions which would fall to be paid were reduced by about £;10,000. When the Civil List of Queen Victoria was arranged considerable reductions were made with respect to political offices, and some were abolished altogether, but that was considered in the amount. But here, though the expenditure was reduced, that was not taken into consideration in the amount. The amount of the Civil List was raised, and the amount to be paid out of it was reduced. There was the one item of "personal staff" added, which was really no addition. Personal staff in the reign of Queen Victoria came out of the privy purse, and now it was made a separate class of its own. In looking over the expenditure of the late Queen he found a large amount put down for Balmoral and Osborne. These palaces belonged to Her Majesty, but he held to the old Whig doctrine that the sovereign ought to hold no personal property of his or her own. The sovereign should give up his personal estates to relatives, if they liked, and should be entirely dependent upon the amount of money voted by the House of Commons. If they had to consider not only what was necessary for the sovereign, but also what was necessary to maintain Balmoral and Sandringham, the Civil List might be raised in order to keep up estates which were of no value to the country. The result of this was that the privy purse had increased enormously. Although there were reductions in the class, the total amount of the privy purse would be £;200,000, which, with all respect to the Sovereign, he was bound to say he thought was somewhat excessive. He wished not only that the Sovereign should have enough to maintain himself in comfort, but that the Court should be conducted with decent magnifi-
cence. He did not, and never would, agree to the doctrine laid down by the majority of the Committee upstairs, that they should never place any restriction upon the hospitality of the Sovereign. If that was true, they were violating their own rule in asking £;470,000. If that was true, what they ought to do was to give the Sovereign power freely to draw what he wished from the Treasury. They knew that the Queen's Court was kept with what he would call decent magnificence, and he was not aware that the present Court required more. A few belonging to the privileged classes who went to the entertainments wanted more to be granted than the late Queen received. He could only say that he never heard of one of his constituents being asked to the functions. This was a little Society matter, and he thought that, in view of the lavish and ostentatious hospitality practised by certain persons in this country who had grown suddenly rich, the Court should set an example of decent hospitality.
Amendment proposed;
"In page 2, line 6, to leave out the word 'seventy,' and insert the word 'fifteen' instead thereof.";(Mr. Labouchere.)
Question proposed, "That the word 'seventy' stand part of the clause."
*SIR F. DIXON-HARTLAND (Middlesex, Uxbridge) said he was very sorry the hon. Member for Northampton had moved this Amendment. It was clearly proved in the Committee upstairs that it was most desirable, in the interest of His Majesty and of the country, that proper provision should be made for the Crown. It was considered that a large expenditure would be required to keep up the dignity and honour of the office, and that it would be far wiser that an amount should be given which would be satisfactory in that way, so that His Majesty should not be obliged to run into debt, because they had made an improper allowance to him. The King had to keep up his Court in very much the same way as other monarchs in Europe had to do. The monarchical principle was fixed in the minds of the people of Europe, and therefore it was desirable that we should keep up the Crown in exactly the same way as was done in other countries. There was
only one country in Europe which at present was not a monarchy. That was France. He was in Paris when the Czar of Russia was there, and had an opportunity of mixing with the people and hearing their sentiments. The feeling he heard expressed on all sides was that they ought to have a monarchy of their own. In discussing this question they ought to consider what had been done abroad. He would give a few figures showing what other countries had done. A comparison of the expenditure equivalent to that of the Civil List in European countries showed the amounts to be:;In Russia, £;2,750,382; Prussia, £;785,965; Austria, £;775,000; Italy, £;642,000; Great Britain, including all the grants to the Royal Family, £;590,000; Spain, £;370,000; Bavaria, £;275,158; Saxony, £;188,960; Belgium, £;140,000; Sweden, £;112,000; Portugal, £;80,300; Holland, £;66,666; and Denmark, £;66,200. In republican France the amount was £;426,240, and in the United States £;442,625. That worked out per head of the population as follows:;Saxony, 11&#x00B7;97d.; Bavaria, 11&#x00B7;35d.; Denmark, 7&#x00B7;27d.; Prussia, 5&#x00B7;92d.; Russia, 5&#x00B7;12d.; Spain, 4&#x00B7;99d.; Belgium, 4&#x00B7;98d.; Italy, 4&#x00B7;84d.; Austria, 4&#x00B7;16d.; Portugal, 3&#x00B7;82d.; Sweden, 3&#x00B7;72d.; Great Britain, 3&#x00B7;46d.; France, 2&#x00B7;66d.; and the United States, 1&#x00B7;69d. But if they took off the value of the Crown lands which was dealt with under the last Amendment it really worked out at a penny per head of the population in this country. He thought they would find that nothing could be cheaper than the amount we had to pay in this country in comparison with other countries.
MR. KEIR HARDIE (Merthyr Tydvil) said the extraordinary figures they had listened to from the hon. Baronet the Member for the Uxbridge Division certainly came as a surprise to him. There was a time in the history of this country when the Civil List included the whole cost of government, apart from the Army and Navy. The figures cited by the hon. Baronet showed that this House was asked to vote to the King and Queen a larger sum than sufficed in the United States for the entire government, including the payment of Members of Parliament.
SIR F. DIXON-HARTLAND said that if in the United States they indulged in the luxury of paying senators the cost was included in the figure he had quoted.
MR. KEIR HARDIE remarked that that was exactly his point. What the hon. Baronet invited the Committee to do was to vote for the King and Queen of England, for their own personal use, a larger sum than was given for the entire government of the United States. If the hon. Baronet was prepared to move an Amendment that King Edward should, out of his Civil List, pay the Members of this House, he would vote for the Amendment. There were two points on which he would invite the Chancellor of the Exchequer to give some information before the question went to the vote. When the subject was last under discussion he asked whether the £;50,000, included in the £;110,000 for the privy purse, which was supposed to be voted to the Queen, would be paid to Her Majesty direct, or to the King, leaving him to dispose of it as he saw fit. Unless the sum was to be paid to her direct, he would move a further Amendment to this clause at the proper stage. If this House voted a sum of money to Queen Alexandra, the more popular of the two;[Cries of "Oh&#x0021;" and "Order&#x0021;"];he would speak the truth even if it did not please hon. Members opposite. If this House voted a sum of money to Her Majesty, they should be sure that it was paid to her direct. He also asked the Chancellor of the Exchequer whether the King continued to hold various commissions which he formerly held in the Army, and, if so, whether he was paid for holding these positions. He found that His Majesty was a Field Marshal on the Active List and colonel of several regiments. Evidently His Majesty did not believe in "one man one job." He should vote for the Amendment because he thought the sum which it specified was more than sufficient. The late Queen and Prince Consort, with a young and increasing family, had a total income for the privy purse of about £;100,000 a year, whereas the sum that was to be voted now to the King and Queen, for whose family separate provision was made, was close on £;200,000. He submitted that this
was to set an example of wasteful extravagance which at a time like this would be injurious to the nation.
MR. E. J. C. MORTON said it seemed to him to be idle to compare the expenditure which might take place during the present reign with what was spent towards the close of the last reign. During the last forty years the sovereign was almost practically in retirement, for reasons which they all knew. We must go back to a period not later than 1861 for the purpose of comparison. Moreover, in making such a comparison, they must remember that during the last forty years there had been a most remarkable increase in the number and extent of great properties in this country. It had been estimated that within the next thirty years, by the falling in of leases, the capital value of the property of one landlord, in a town which was not London, would be increased by £;40,000,000. They knew that for many years to come there was not the slightest chance of our giving up the monarchical system in this country; and he held, from a purely democratic point of view, that it would be a danger to the country if the monarch were not among the wealthiest men in the country. The sovereign must have great influence in the State, and he was not prepared to submit the sovereign to the temptations of undue influence, and to run the risk of increasing the power of those men whose properties had become so great within the last forty years, a power that was already a social danger.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: I think it is not necessary to detain the Committee at any length in regard to the proposals of the hon. Member for Northampton. The hon. Member has stated to the Committee precisely the views which he stated to the Committee upstairs, and that Committee decided against him, not merely by a majority, for he could get no one to support his views. I am not disposed to compare the Civil List with that of other countries, or to discuss the view expressed by the hon. Member who has just sat down. But I do think that the proposals which the Government submitted to the Committee upstairs, and to which that Committee agreed unanimously,
with the exception of the hon. Member for Northampton, if they erred, erred on the side of moderation. I rise merely to answer a question asked by the hon. Member for Merthyr Tydvil with regard to the colonelcies held by the King in the Army. Those are purely honorary appointments. His Majesty is, I believe, colonel of more than one regiment, but he receives not one single penny in respect
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Haldane, Richard Burdon
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Hall, Edward Marshall
Aird, Sir John
Craig, Robert Hunter
Halsey, Thomas Frederick
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Hamilton, Rt. Hn Lord G (Mid'x
Allsopp, Hon. George
Crombie, John William
Hamilton, Marq of (L'nd'nderry
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Crossley, Sir Savile
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir Wm.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Dalkeith, Earl of
Hardy, Lawrence (Kent, Ashf'd
Austin, Sir John
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Davies, Sir Horatio D (Chatham
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Baldwin, Alfred
Denny, Colonel
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Dewar, T R (T'rH'mlets, S. Geo.
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur D.
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Heaton, John Henniker
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Helder, Augustus
Banbury, Frederick George
Dixon-Hartland, Sir F. Dixon
Hermon Hodge, Robert T.
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Doughty, George
Higginbottom, S. W.
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Hill, Arthur
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Hoare, Edw. B. (Hampstead)
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Duncan, J. Hastings
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Bigwood, James
Dunn, Sir William
Holland, William Henry
Black, Alexander William
Edwards, Frank
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Elliot, Hon. A. Ralph Douglas
Hope, John Deans (Fife, W.)
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Emmott, Alfred
Horniman, Frederick John
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Middlesex)
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
Bowles, T. Gibson (King's Lynn
Fardell, Sir T. George
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham)
Brassey, Albert
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Hozier, Hon. James Henry C.
Broadhurst, Henry
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leigh)
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Brookfield, Col. Montagu
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Jacoby, James Alfred
Brown, Alexander H. (Shropsh.
Finch, George H.
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Bryce, Rt. Hon. James
Finlay, Sir Robt. Bannatyne
Jessel, Capt. Herbert Merton
Brymer, William Ernest
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex-
Bull, William James
Fisher, William Hayes
Joicey, Sir James
Butcher, John George
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Buxton, Sydney Charles
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Kay-Shuttleworth, Rt Hn Sir U
Caine, William Sproston
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Kearley, Hudson E.
Caldwell, James
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H.
Cameron, Robert
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J A (Glasgow
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir Henry
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop)
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H.
Garfit, William
Keswick, William
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Gibbs, Hn. A. G. H (City of Lond.
Kimber, Henry
Cautley, Henry Strother
Gladstone, Rt. Hn. Herbert J.
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbyshire
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Kinloch, Sir John George S.
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Knowles, Lees
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Gore, Hon. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.)
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth)
Chamberlain, Rt Hon. J. (Birm.
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Lawson, John Grant
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Graham, Henry Robert
Lecky, Rt Hn. William Edw. H.
Chapman, Edward
Grant, Corrie
Lee, Arthur H (Hants, Fareham
Charrington, Spencer
Green, Walford D. (Wedn'sbury
Lees, Sir Elliott (Birkenhead)
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington
Cochrane, Hon. T. H. A. E.
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Coddington, Sir William
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Gretton, John
Leng, Sir John
Colomb, Sir John Charles Ready
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Levy, Maurice
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Groves, James Grimble
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
of these appointments. That portion of their Majesties' Privy Purse which will be allocated to the Queen will, in accordance with precedent, be paid direct to Her Majesty's privy purse.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 335; Noes, 52. (Division List No. 231.)
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Parker, Gilbert
Soames, Arthur Wellesley
Long, Rt. Hn Walter (Bristol, S.
Partington, Oswald
Spear, John Ward
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Paulton, James Mellor
Spencer, Rt Hn C R (Northants.
Lowe, Francis William
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Spencer, E. (W. Bromwich)
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Pease, Herb. Pike (Darlington)
Stanley, Edward Jas. (Somerset
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James (Kent)
Peel, Hn. Wm Robert Wellesley
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Percy, Earl
Stevenson, Francis S.
Lucas, R. J. (Portsmouth)
Perks, Robert William
Strachey, Edward
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Philipps, John Wynford
Stroyan, John
Macdona, John Cumming
Pilkington, Lieut.-Col. Richard
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Talbot, Rt. Hon. J. G. (Oxf'd U.
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Plummer, Walter R.
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
M'Iver, Sir Lewis (Edinburgh W
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Tennant, Harold John
M'Kenna, Reginald
Pretyman, Ernest George
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Majendie, James A. H.
Purvis, Robert
Thomas, J. A. (Gl'm'gan Gower)
Malcolm, Ian
Pym, C. Guy
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Manners, Lord Cecil
Quilter, Sir Cuthbert
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Mansfield, Horace Rendall
Randles, John S.
Thornton, Percy M.
Maple, Sir John Blundell
Rankin, Sir James
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Markham, Arthur Basil
Rasch, Major Frederic Carne
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Rea, Russell
Tuke, Sir John Batty
Maxwell, Rt Hn Sir H. E (Wigt'n
Reid, James (Greenock)
Ure, Alexander
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Remnant, James Farquharson
Valentia, Viscount
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Wallace, Robert
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Ridley, Hn M. W. (Stalybridge)
Walton, John L. (Leeds, S.)
Middlemore, John Throgmort'n
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Milner, Rt. Hn. Sir Frederick G.
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. C. Thomson
Wanklyn, James Leslie
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan)
Montagu, Hon. J. Scott (Hants.
Robinson, Brooke
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
Morgan, David J. (Walthams'w
Robson, William Snowdon
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E (Taunton
Morgan, Hn. Fred. (Monm'thsh.
Roe, Sir Thomas
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
Morley, Rt. Hn. John (Montrose
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel Walter
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John L.
Morrison, James Archibald
Round, James
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Russell, T. W.
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Moss, Samuel
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Moulton, John Pletcher
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Williams, O. (Merioneth)
Mount, William Arthur
Sassoon, Sir Edward Albert
Williams, Col. R. (Dorset)
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Scott, Sir S. (Marylebone, W.)
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Muntz, Philip A.
Seely, Charles Hilton (Lincoln)
Wilson, A Stanley (York, E. R.)
Murray, Rt Hn A. Graham (Bute
Seton-Karr, Henry
Wilson, Chas. Hy. (Hull, W.)
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Shaw, Charles E. (Stafford)
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh., N.
Myers, William Henry
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick B.)
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Newdigate, Francis Alex.
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew)
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Nicholson, William Graham
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Sinclair, Capt. John (Forfarsh.
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Norman, Henry
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
O'Neill, Hon. Rbt. Torrens
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Palmer, Sir Chas. M. (Durham)
Smith, H C (North'mb., T'neside
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Palmer, George Wm. (Reading)
Smith, James P. (Lanarks.)
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand)
NOES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Hammond, John
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Ambrose, Robert
Hardie, J. Keir (Merthyr Tydvil
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Atherley-Jones, L.
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Malley, William
Blake, Edward
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Mara, James
Boland, John
Leamy, Edmund
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Burke, E. Haviland-
Lundon, W.
Power, Patrick Joseph
Burt, Thomas
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Reckitt, Harold James
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
M'Dermott, Patrick
Reddy, M.
Crean, Eugene
M'Govern, T.
Redmond, J. E. (Waterford)
Cullinan, J.
Mooney, John J.
Redmond, William (Clare)
Delany, William
Murnaghan, George
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Dillon, John
Murphy, J.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Donelan, Captain A.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Sullivan, Donal
Doogan, P. C.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
Duffy, William J.
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Fenwick, Charles
O'Brien, K. (Tipperary, Mid)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Labouchere and Mr. John Burns.
Flavin, Michael Joseph
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Gilhooly, James
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
MR. KEIR HARDIE said he rose for the purpose of moving the addition of certain words to the clause as it stood. Naturally they were all pleased to hear the statement of the right hon. Gentleman the Chancellor of the Exchequer, to the effect that a certain amount from the privy purse was to be devoted to the use of Her Majesty the Queen. But the question was, what was that amount to be? He thought the House of Commons should have something to say in deciding what proportion of the Civil List should be paid to Her Majesty. In these days of woman's rights and all the rest of it, it seemed but right and proper that the House of Commons should decide how much Her Majesty was to receive out of the sum they had just voted. His Amendment was to add after Clause 2 the words, "£;50,000 of which sum shall be paid to Her Majesty Queen Alexandra for her sole and separate use." He hoped that whatever difference of opinion there might be as to the total amount of the privy purse, there would not be any great difference of opinion as to the desirability of the nation saying, through its representatives, what proportion of it was to be paid to the Queen. He could not speak from personal knowledge, but he was told that it was common to provide marriage portions, pin-money, and other allowances to wives, and the proposal he now submitted would carry out that idea. The King, despite his great qualities, was, after all, but human, and it might prove too great a temptation to him were he to be allowed an undisputed sway as to how the privy purse was to be disposed of. If the Chancellor of the Exchequer could assure the Committee that some reasonable part of the £;110,000 of the privy purse was to be paid to Her Majesty direct, then it was needless to say he would not seek to press his Amendment; but failing any such assurance, as a matter of principle and as a matter of precaution, he would invite the Committee
AYES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Caine, William Sproston
Dillon, John
Ambrose, Robert
Caldwell, James
Donelan, Captain A.
Atherley-Jones, L.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Doogan, P. C.
Blake, Edward
Crean, Eugene
Duffy, William J.
Boland, John
Cullinan, J.
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Burke, E. Haviland-
Delany, William
Flavin, Michael Joseph
to divide on the Amendment, which he now begged to move.
Amendment proposed;
"In page 2, line 6, at the end of the clause to add the words 'fifty thousand pounds of which shall be paid to Her Majesty Queen Alexandra for her sole and separate use.'";(Mr. Keir Hardie.)
Question proposed, "That those words be there added."
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: The proposal of the Committee and the proposal of the Bill really is that the privy purse should be their Majesties' jointly. That follows exactly the precedent of the Civil List Act of King William IV. and Queen Adelaide. For that reason I do not consider the Amendment of the hon. Member is advisable, and I cannot accept it. I do not see any reason to conceal from the House, what I communicated to the Committee upstairs, that the amount which will be paid to Her Majesty the Queen will be £;33,000 a year.
MR. LABOUCHERE said he was bound to say that he thought the arrangement was not one to which the House ought to agree. The late Queen had £;60,000 voted for her privy purse. The King, following the precedent of King William IV. and Queen Adelaide, was to receive £;110,000; that was to say, £;50,000 in excess of Her late Majesty. If His Majesty were not married, obviously it would be considered that £;60,000 would be amply sufficient. Surely, therefore, it would have been understood, without the present explanation of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that Her Majesty Queen Alexandra was to receive the extra amount, and that was the reason for increasing the privy purse from £;60,000 to £;110,000. If his hon. friend went to a division he should vote with him.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 65; Noes, 310. (Division List No. 232.).
Flynn, James Christopher
Mooney, John J.
Reddy, M.
Gilhooly, James
Murnaghan, George
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Grant, Corrie
Murphy, J.
Redmond, William (Clare)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Hammond, John
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Robson, Wm. Snowdon
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Shaw, Charles Edw. (Stafford)
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
O'Brien, Kendal (T'pper'ry, Mid
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Sullivan, Donal
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Thomas J A (Glamorgan, Gower
Leamy, Edmund
O'Connor, James (Wicklow W.
Ure, Alexander
Levy, Maurice
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Weir, James Galloway
Lewis, John Herbert
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Lundon, W.
O'Malley, William
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
O'Mara, James
M'Dermott, Patrick
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr. Keir Hardie and Mr. Labouchere.
M'Govern, T.
Power, Patrick Joseph
M'Kenna, Reginald
Reckitt, Harold James
NOES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Gretton, John
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Groves, James Grimble
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Haldane, Richard Burdon
Allsopp, Hon. George
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Hall, Edward Marshall
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Craig, Robert Hunter
Halsey, Thomas Frederick
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Cronborne, Viscount
Hamilton, Rt Hn Ld. G. (Midd'x
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Crombie, John William
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir William
Austin, Sir John
Crossley, Sir Savile
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashford
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Cust, Henry John C.
Haslam, Sip Alfred S.
Baldwin, Alfred
Dalkeith, Earl of
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Balfour, Rt. Hn. A. J. (Manch'r
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Davies, Sir Horatio D. (Chatham
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur D.
Balfour, Maj. K R (Christchurch
Davies, M. Vaughan (Cardigan
Heaton, John Henniker
Banbury, Frederick George
Dewar, T. R. (T'rH'mlets, S. Geo
Helder, Augustus
Bathurst, Hon. Allen Benjamin
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Hermon-Hodge, Robert T.
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H (Bristol)
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Higginbottom, S. W.
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Dixon-Hartland, Sir F. Dixon
Hill, Arthur
Bigwood, James
Doughty, George
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Black, Alexander William
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Holland, William Henry
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightsd.
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Duncan, J. Hastings
Horniman, Frederick John
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Middlesex)
Dunn, Sir William
Houldsworth, Sir W. Henry
Bowles, T. Gibson (Kings Lynn)
Edwards, Frank
Houston, Robert Paterson
Brassey, Albert
Elliot, Hon. A. Ralph Douglas
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham)
Broadhurst, Henry
Fardell, Sir T. George
Hozier, Hon. James Henry C.
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Brown, Alexander H. (Shropsh.
Fenwick, Charles
Jacoby, James Alfred
Bryce, Rt. Hon. James
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Brymer, William Ernest
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Jessell, Captain Herbert M.
Bull, William James
Finch, George H.
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Burt, Thomas
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Joicey, Sir James
Butcher, John George
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Kay-Shuttleworth, Rt Hn Sir U
Buxton, Sydney Charles
Fisher, William Hayes
Kearley, Hudson E.
Cameron, Robert
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H.
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J. A (Glasgow
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Kenyon, Hon. G. T. (Denbigh)
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edward H.
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Keswick, William
Cautley, Henry Strother
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Kimber, Henry
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir Henry
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Garfit, William
Kinloch, Sir John George S.
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Gibbs, Hn. A. G. H. (City of Lond
Knowles, Lees
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Lambton, Hon. Frederick W.
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.)
Gordon, Hn J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Lawrence, W. F. (Liverpool)
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Gore, Hon. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.)
Lawson, John Grant
Chapman, Edward
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Lecky, Rt. Hon. Wm. E. H.
Charrington, Spencer
Goschen, Hon George Joachim
Lee, A. H. (Hants., Fareham)
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Green, Walford D. (Wednesby.
Lees, Sir Elliott (Birkenhead)
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington
Coddington, Sir William
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Leng, Sir John
Nicol, Nonald Ninian
Spear, John Ward
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Norman, Henry
Spencer, Rt Hn. C R. (Northant
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
O'Neill, Hon. Robert T.
Spencer, Ernest (W. Bromwich
Long, Rt. Hn. W. (Bristol, S.)
Palmer, Sir Chas. M. (Durham
Stanley, Edw. Jas. (Somerset)
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Palmer, George W. (Reading)
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Lough, Thomas
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Stevenson, Francis S.
Lowe, Francis William
Parker, Gilbert
Stewart, Sir Mark J M'Taggart
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Partington, Oswald
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Lowther, Rt. Hn. James (Kent)
Paulton, James Mellor
Stroyan, John
Lucas, Col. P. (Lowestoft)
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsm'th)
Pease, Herbert P. (Darlington
Talbot, Rt. Hn. J G (Oxf'd Univ.
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Peel, Hn. Wm. Robert W.
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Macdona, John Cumming
Perks, Robert William
Tennant, Harold John
Maconochie, A. W.
Phillips, John Wynford
Thomas, F Freeman (Hastings
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.
M'Arthur, William (Cornw'll)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Thorburn, Sir Walter
M'Iver, Sir Lewis (Edinb'rgh W
Plummer, Walter R.
Thornton, Percy M.
Majendie, James A. H.
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Malcolm, Ian
Pretyman, Ernest George
Tufnell, Lt.-Col. Edward
Manners, Lord Cecil
Purvis, Robert
Tuke, Sir John Batty
Mansfield, Horace Rendall
Quilter, Sir Cuthbert
Valentia, Viscount
Maple, Sir John Blundell
Randles, John S.
Wallace, Robert
Markham, Arthur Basil
Rankin, Sir James
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Rasch, Major Frederick C.
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley
Maxwell, Rt Hn Sir H E (Wigton
Rea, Russell
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Reid, James (Greenock)
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Welby, Lt.-Cl. A. C. E (Tannton.
Middlemore, John T.
Ridley, S. F. (Bethnal Green)
Welb'y, Sir Chas. G. E. (Notts.
Milner, Rt. Hon. Sir Fred. G.
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. Chas. T.
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Wharton, Rt. Hon. J. Lloyd
Montagu, Hon. J. Scott (Hants.
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Morgan, David J. (Walth'mst'w
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u-Lyne-
Morgan, Hn. Fred (Monm'thsh.
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel W.
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Money, Charles (Breconshire)
Round, James
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth
Morley, Rt. Hn. J. (Montrose
Russell, T. W.
Williams, Col. R. (Dorset)
Morris, Hon. Martin H. F.
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Morrison, James Archibald
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Wilson, A. Stanley (York, E. R.
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Wilson, Chas. Henry (Hull, W.
Morton, E. J. C. (Devonport)
Sassoon, Sir Edward Albert
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Moss, Samuel
Seely, Chas. Hilton (Lincoln)
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh, N.)
Moulton, John Fletcher
Sharpe, Wm. Edward T.
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks
Mount, William Arthur
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick B.)
Wodehouse, Rt Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew
Wortley, Rt. Hn. C. B. Stuart-
Muntz, Philip A.
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Murray, Rt. Hn. A. G. (Bute)
Sinclair, Capt. J. (Forfarshire)
Young, Commander (Berks, E.
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Myers, William Henry
Smith, H. C (North'mb. T'nes'de
Newdigate, Francis Alex.
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks
Nicholson, William Graham
Smith, Hn. W. F. D. (Strand)
Clause agreed to.
Clause 3:;
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Clause 3 stand part of the Bill."
MR. LABOUCHERE said he had looked into history with reference to the subject matter of this clause. He found that Prince Frederick, son of George II., received, including the revenue from the Duchy of Cornwall, £;52,000. The Prince wanted more, as was the habit of most people, but the House of Commons refused to increase the sum. On the death of Prince Frederick the Prince
of Wales;afterwards George III.;had £;20,000, which was increased to £;40,000 per annum. George IV., who was a somewhat expensive gentleman, received as Prince of Wales £;50,000 a year, which, with the revenue from the Duchy of Cornwall, gave him £;63,000. But he incurred debts to the amount of £;650,000, and his allowance was raised to £;113,000. As, however, £;60,000 was allocated for the payment of his debts, with interest, he only, in fact, received £;63,000. In past times it was always thrown back wards and forwards in the House of Commons whether the Prince of Wales should receive a large salary or not. The Opposition thought that if they could
curry favour with the Prince of Wales they might get into power, and, accordingly, they were always in favour of giving him a large salary. The Government of the day, however, supported by the King, were always in favour of granting him a small amount. His present Majesty as Prince of Wales received £;60,000, and Queen Alexandra as Princess of Wales received £;10,000, or £;70,000. At that time the Duchy of Cornwall produced £;14,000, and it was estimated £;84,000 per annum was amply sufficient for the Prince and Princess of Wales. At present the Duchy of Cornwall produced a little over £;60,000, and there was a proposal that the Duchess of Cornwall should receive £;10,000, in addition to which the Committee knew very well that when the Duke went abroad on visits such as that he was now paying to the Colonies he received large travelling allowances. Taking the Civil List at £;540,000, £;70,000 for the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall was more in proportion with it than the £;130,000 which was practically proposed by the Government. It seemed to him that £;70,000 was amply sufficient, and he did not see that more was required. If it were proved to him that more was required in order to keep up the state and dignity of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall he would be perfectly ready to vote it, but all the Committee had had up to the present were general statements. He was regarded as a kind of idol hater who went into temples protesting against diamonds and gold chains being hung on idols, but in this matter he thought that £;70,000 was sufficient. Could the Chancellor of the Exchequer show it was not? A suggestion had been made by the hon. Member for Plymouth that as there were so many rich people in the country, some of whom were worth £;2,000,000 of money, His Majesty should be given £;3,000,000; but his plan would be much more simple. He would rather confiscate a great deal of the money of these millionaires than increase the amount of the Civil List, but that was a course which he could not hope would recommend itself to the Conservative party. However, he thought that with £;70,000 a year a gentleman, though he happened to be the son of the Sovereign, ought to be
able to rub along very comfortably, and he should, therefore, vote against the clause, but he should like the right hon. Gentleman to enlighten his ignorance.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: The hon. Member has made a discursive speech, but as he asks me to enlighten his ignorance I would refer him to the appendix to the Report of the Committee, which is entirely at variance with the figures given by the hon. Member as to the allowance made by Parliament to his present Majesty when he was Prince of Wales. As far back as 1863 there was granted to his present Majesty £;40,000 a year, at the same time His Majesty receiving £;46,000 a year from the revenues of the Duchy of Cornwall. There was a further grant of £;10,000 a year for her present Majesty, then Princess of Wales, and that altogether made up £;96,000 a year just the same amount as the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York will, in all, receive. Therefore on what ground the hon. Member proposes that this clause should be rejected I cannot imagine. It has been thought necessary to make some reduction in the amount to be voted to the Duke of Cornwall and York, as the circumstances of the Heir Apparent when a Queen was on the Throne were somewhat different; but we could not ask Parliament to grant less than is now proposed in the clause;£;20,000 a year.
*MR. KEIR HARDIE said he rose to support the Amendment, not because the amount proposed was too large but because the whole principle was wrong. The reason the House of Commons was called upon to vote the sum was that the Duke of Cornwall was the prospective heir to the Throne, and it was necessary to pay him a sort of retaining fee until such time as he was required to occupy that august position in order that he might learn his duties. Outside Royalty it was not the custom to do any such thing. Business men who desired to train their sons to any particular profession had to bear the cost of that training. Already the House had voted £;20,000 for the personal expenses of the Duke of Cornwall and £;40,000 for the ships of war which accompanied him,
upon a journey he had undertaken to make himself better acquainted with the various parts of the Empire which he would one day be called upon to rule. He should vote for the Amendment.
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Cust, Henry John C.
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Dalkeith, Earl of
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Jacoby, James Alfred
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Davies, Sir Horatio D (Chatham
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Allhusen, Augustus Henry E.
Davies, M Vaughan- (Cardigan)
Jessel, Capt. Herbert Merton
Allsopp, Hon. George
Dewar, T R (T'rH'mlets, S. Geo.
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Jones, William (Carnarvons.)
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Dixon-Hartland, Sir F. Dixon
Kearley, Hudson E.
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Doughty, George
Kennaway, Rt. Hn. Sir John H.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Austin, Sir John
Doxford, Sir Wm. Theodore
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W (Salop.
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Duncan, J. Hastings
Keswick, William
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Dunn, Sir William
Kimber, Henry
Baldwin, Alfred
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Edwards, Frank
Kinloch, Sir John George Smyth
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Elliot, Hon. A. Ralph Douglas
Kitson, Sir James
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Knowles, Lees
Banbury, Frederick George
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Lambton, Hon. Fredk. Wm.
Bathurst, Hon. Allen B.
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Fenwick, Charles
Lawson, John Grant
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Lecky, Rt. Hon. Wm. Edw. H.
Bigwood, James
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Lees, Sir Elliott (Birkenhead)
Black, Alexander William
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Leese, Sir Joseph F (Accrington
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Fisher, William Hayes
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Blundell, Colonel Henry
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Leng, Sir John
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
FitzGerald, Lord Edmond
Levy, Maurice
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Middlesex
Fitzroy, Hn. Edw. Algernon
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Bowles, T Gibson (King's Lynn)
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Brassey, Albert
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir Henry
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S
Broadhurst, Henry
Garfit, William
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Brodrick, Rt. Hn. St. John
Gibbs, Hn. A. G. H. (City of Lond
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Gladstone, Rt. Hn Herbert John
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James (Kent
Brown, Alex. H. (Shropshire)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Brymer, William Ernest
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Bull, William James
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Burt, Thomas
Grant, Corrie
Macdona, John Cumming
Butcher, John George
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Maconochie, A. W.
Caldwell, James
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H.
Gretton, John
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Groves, James Grimble
M'Iver, Sir L. (Edinburgh, W.)
Cautley, Henry Strother
Guthrie, Walter Murray
M'Kenna, Reginald
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Hall, Edward Marshall
M'Laren, Charles Benjamin
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Halsey, Thomas Frederick
Majendie, James A. H.
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G (Middx
Malcolm, Ian
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Manners, Lord Cecil
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.)
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir William
Mansfield, Horaoe Rendall
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Worc'r
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Chapman, Edward
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfrieshire
Charrington, Spencer
Harwood, George
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Hay, Hn. Claude George
Middlemore, John T.
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Milner, Rt. Hn. Sir Fredk. G.
Coddington, Sir William
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur D.
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Heaton, John Henniker
Montagu, Hon. J. Scott. (Hants.
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Helder, Augustus
Morgan, David J (Walth'mstow
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Morgan, Hn. Fred (Monm'thsh.
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Higginbottom, S. W.
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Hill, Arthur
Morrison, James Archibald
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Craig, Robert Hunter
Hope, J F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Cranborne, Viscount
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
Moss, Samuel
Crombie, John William
Houston, Robert Paterson
Mount, William Arthur
Crossley, Sir Savile
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham)
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Hozier, Hon. James Henry Cecil
Muntz, Philip A.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 294; Noes, 46. (Division List No. 233).
Murray, Rt Hn A Graham (Bute
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Thornton, Percy M.
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Robson, William Snowdon
Tufnell, Lt.-Col. Edward
Myers, William Henry
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Tuke, Sir John Batty
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Round, James
Ure, Alexander
Nicholson, William Graham
Russell, T. W.
Valentia, Viscount
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Wallace, Robert
Norman, Henry
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Walton, John L. (Leeds, S.)
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Palmer, Sir Charles M. (Durham
Seely, Charles Hilton (Lincoln)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Palmer, George Wm. (Heading)
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Wason, E. (Clackmannan)
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Shaw-Stewart, M. H (Renfrew
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
Parker, Gilbert
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Weir, James Galloway
Partington, Oswald
Sinclair, Capt. J. (Forfarshire
Welby, Lt.-Col. A. C. E. (T'nt'n)
Paulton, James Mellor
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Pease, Herbt. Pike (Darlington
Smith, H. C (N'rth'mb., T'neside
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John L.
Peel, Hn Wm. Robert Wellesley
Smith, James P. (Lanarks.)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Perks, Robert William
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand)
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne)
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Spear, John Ward
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C. R. (N'rth'nts
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Stanley, Edw. Jas. (Somerset)
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Pretyman, Ernest George
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Purvis, Robert
Stevenson, Francis S.
Wilson, A. S. (York, E. R.)
Quilter, Sir Cuthbert
Stewart, Sir M. J. M'Taggart
Wilson, Charles H. (Hull, W.)
Randles, John S.
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Wilson, Hy. J. (York, W. R.)
Rankin, Sir James
Strachey, Edward
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Rasch, Major Frederic Carne
Stroyan, John
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh, N.)
Rea, Russell
Talbot, Rt. Hon. J. G. (Oxf'd U.)
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Reckitt, Harold James
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Reid, James (Greenock)
Tennant, Harold John
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Thomas, F. Freeman (Hastings
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Ridley, Hon M. W. (Stalybridge
Thomas, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Thorburn, Sir Walter
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Ambrose, Robert
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Kelly, James (Rosc'mm'n, N.
Blake, Edward
Leamy, Edmund
O'Malley, William
Boland, John
Lundon, W.
O'Mara, James
Burke, E. Haviland-
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Caine, William Sproston
M'Dermott, Patrick
Power, Patrick Joseph
Crean, Eugene
M'Govern, T.
Reddy, M.
Cullinan, J.
Mooney John J.
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Delaney, William
Murnaghan, George
Redmond, William (Clare)
Dillon, John
Murphy, John
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Donelan, Captain A.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Doogan, P. C.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Sullivan, Donal
Duffy, William J.
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipp'rary Mid
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Labouchere and Mr. Keir Hardie.
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Hammond, John
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Clause 4 agreed to.
Clause 5:;
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Clause 5 stand part of the Bill."
MR. LABOUCHERE said he would not move the Amendment he had placed on the Paper to substitute £;50,000 for £;70,000. He and his hon. friend had tried to befriend Queen Alexandra, but they had been opposed both by the Government and also hon. Gentlemen
sitting on the Liberal benches. It was quite evident, from what had already taken place, the age of chivalry had passed, and, after the scurvy way in which she had been treated by the House, he did not wish to deprive Her Majesty of any benefit she might derive from this clause in the event of her surviving the King.
Question put, and agreed to.
Clause 6:;
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That Clause 6 stand part of the Bill."
MR. LABOUCHERE objected to the clause on the ground that it proposed to divide up the amount given to His Majesty into various classes. That was a course of which he disapproved, because, in his opinion, it showed a certain distrust of the King. If a large sum was to be voted for his household the King should be allowed to dispose of that sum. These classes were first adopted in the Civil List of George IV. In the reign of George III. Mr. Burke proposed that the Civil List should be divided into classes, and that the last class should be payments to Lords of the Treasury. The Lords of the Treasury strongly objected to this, because one of Mr. Burke's proposals was that if the amounts in the other classes were exhausted the Lords of the Treasury should not have anything for their class. One reason why he objected to this classification was that it allotted sums not only to particular classes, but to various items in each particular class, and although the sovereign was not obliged to expend money in a particular way, it was a strong recommendation to him to do so. There were a great many political officers in His Majesty's household, and it was a scandal and an outrage that, when a change of Government took place, money which was supposed to be provided for the maintenance of the State was distributed as bribes in the House of Lords. One Lord was made Lord Chamberlain and another Lord Steward. The Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Steward, and the Master of the Horse were of no use;they were merely ornamental. One had only to look at the papers to see that there was a very large body of gentlemen permanently attached to the Court for these purposes. These gentlemen liked the positions, and, he presumed, they liked the money. These positions were simply given to them as rewards for past services to the party in power. He also objected to the ecclesiastical salaries. He took exception, in Committee, to the number of the King's chaplains, which was thirty-four, and he was supported in his action by His Majesty, or at any rate His Majesty was influenced by what he had said, which had no doubt been communicated to him, because he at once reduced the number of his chaplains by twenty-four.
He would like to see that process with regard to chaplains continued. He would like the number to be still further reduced by ten. He would like to see the King rid himself of not only all the chaplains, but the political officers as well. A chaplain got only £;40, but over £;5,000 was charged for ecclesiastical salaries. That really amounted to an endowment of the Church of England. This was a personal matter, and he did not wish Parliament to interfere with the discretion of the King by laying down the heads of the expenditure, as it showed a want of confidence in him. Now that the money saved in any class went to the privy purse and not back to the Treasury, there was no purpose in dividing the Civil List into classes.
MR. M'KENNA (Monmouthshire, N.) also objected to the clause, but for somewhat different reasons. His view was that there was a great deal of expenditure which was useless, and served no proper purpose, and His Majesty also held that view, as would be seen from the fact that he had effected considerable retrenchments in various classes. But the result of all such retrenchments ought to go into the Treasury, and not go to swell the privy purse of the sovereign. The Committee settled an amount which they considered sufficient for the privy purse, and if the clause were allowed to stand it would mean that the effect would be that where any economy was effected in different classes the money saved would go into the privy purse, and not into the Treasury. He submitted that the proper course would be to hold an inquiry into the expenditure in the different classes, and having held that inquiry, to put the total amount of expenditure in each class at a figure which the Committee found to be appropriate, and that the result of any economy which happened to be effected should be paid back into the Treasury. With regard to the ecclesiastical offices, the King himself had now reduced the expenditure on ecclesiastical offices and salaries by £;720 a year, and that saving ought not to go to the privy purse, but to the reduction of the Civil List.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: I believe that the hon. Member is prema-
ture in saying that economy in the ecclesiastical establishment has already been effected, though the King has had the matter under his consideration. The effect of omitting the clause would be to leave it in the power of the sovereign to decide to what purposes the whole of the Civil List should be applied. That is contrary to the practice of Parliament for many years. If the proposal is adopted Parliament will lose all control over the officers of the Court and the state of the Court. At present, although it is possible to effect economies in the different classes, yet transfers of expenditure from one class to another have to be approved by the Treasury. His Majesty's Government are not prepared to assent to a change which, to my mind, is almost unconstitutional.
SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT (Monmouth, W.): I very much agree with the Chancellor of the Exchequer that it is impossible to support the view that in voting this large sum of money the sovereign should be allowed to dispose of it as he thinks fit. The whole object of voting this money is to maintain the dignity of the Crown, and Parliament by the Civil List which it proposes indicates in general terms what it regards as belonging to the dignity of the Crown. The hon. Member for Northampton said that this is a new doctrine. So it is. But it was introduced because in the time of George III. the Civil List had been appropriated to purposes of which Parliament did not approve. Anyone familiar with the speeches of Burke on the Civil List would know that he condemned the course taken by George III. on the ground that the Civil List had been devoted, not to maintaining the dignity of the Crown, but to the promotion of the war in America. Therefore the new principle of indicating how the Civil List should be appropriated was adopted; and I must differ from the hon. Member for Northampton in preferring that constitutional doctrine.
MR. LABOUCHERE said the right hon. Gentleman had offered a piece of advice which might or might not be taken by the sovereign, and which in
many instances, it was quite certain would not be taken. If clauses were put into the Bill by which it was provided that any money not paid to a particular class should remain in the Treasury, he could understand the value of such provisions. The Bill did not provide that the money must be spent in the particular classes, and that did away with the only reason for the division into classes. As the advantages of such an arrangement were not derived by the Treasury it was better that the whole amount should go to the sovereign in one sum. His reason for not voting in the Civil List Committee for the Amendment of the hon. Member for North Monmouth was that after voting against many large, sound, and practical reductions, the hon. Member proposed that after the whole matter had been settled the House should appoint a Committee composed of Members of both Houses of Parliament, and the head housemaid, or the head scullery wench, and other such persons, to consider whether a housemaid could be suppressed here, and a scullery wench there. Such a course would be like shutting the stable door after the steed was stolen. It was derogatory to Members of the House that they should be called upon to sit day after day with two or three housemaids and scullery wenches, to discuss these matters, and therefore he refused to vote for such silly little proposals.
MR. M'KENNA, having pointed out that the Amendment to which the hon. Member for Northampton alluded was an altogether different one from that to which he had referred in his previous remarks, drew the attention of the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the fact that £;193,000 was put down for the expenses of His Majesty's Household, the members of which numbered something over 900. If by proper economies the Household could be reduced to 500, and the charge brought down to £;100,000, the Treasury would have no power to prevent that reduction, and the other £;93,000 would go automatically into the privy purse, instead of reverting to the Treasury, as the control of the Treasury applied only to transfers from one class to another, and not to reductions or economies in any particular class.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH said the hon. Member had supposed an impossible case in suggesting that the Royal Household might be reduced from 900 to 500. Under the Amendment now proposed the sovereign would be enabled to abolish the Royal Household altogether, and, if he chose, distribute the money so saved among a number of members of the House of Lords;to whom the hon. Member
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Davies, Sir Horatio D (Chatham
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Davies, M Vaughan- (Cardigan
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.
Keswick, William
Allhusen, Augustus H. Eden
Dewar, T. R (T'rH'mlets S. Geo.
Kimber, Henry
Allsopp, Hon. George
Doughty, George
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Kinloch, Sir John Geo. Smyth
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Kitson, Sir James
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Duncan, J. Hastings
Lambton, Hon. Fredk. Wm.
Asquith, Rt. Hn. Herb. Henry
Dunn, Sir William
Lawson, John Grant
Atkinson, Rt. Hn. John
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Austin, Sir John
Dyke, Rt. Hn. Sir Wm. Hart
Lee, Arthur H (Hants., Fareh'm
Bagot, Capt. Josceline Fitzroy
Edwards, Frank
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington
Bain, Col. James Robert
Evans, S. T. (Glamorgan)
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Baldwin, Alfred
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Leng, Sir John
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J (Manch'r
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Fenwick, Charles
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Banbury, Frederick George
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H (Bristol)
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James (Kent
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Fisher, William Hayes
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Bigwood, James
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Black, Alexander William
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Macdona, John Cumming
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Forster, Henry William
Maconochie, A. W.
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir Henry
M'Arthur, Wm. (Cornwall)
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Midd'x)
Garfit, William
M'Iver, Sir Lewis (Edinburgh W
Bowles, T. Gibson (King's Lynn
Gibbs, Hn A. G. H. (City of Lond
Malcolm, Ian
Brigs, John
Gladstone, Rt. Hn. Herb. John
Mansfield, Horace Rendall
Broadhurst, Henry
Gordon, Hn. J. E (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Goschen, Hon. Geo. Joachim
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Brymer, William Ernest
Grant, Corrie
Meysey-Thomson, Sir H. M.
Bull, William James
Greene, Sir E. W (Bry S Edm'nds
Milner, Rt. Hn. Sir Fredk. G.
Burt, Thomas
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Butcher, John George
Griffith, Ellis J.
Morgar, David J. (Walthams'w
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H.
Groves, James Grimble
Morgan, Hn. Fred. (Monm'thsh
Carlile, William Walter
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Hall, Edward Marshall
Morrison, James Archibald
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G (Middx
Morton, Arthur H. A (Deptford
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Hanbury, Rt. Hn. Rbt. Wm.
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir Wm.
Moss, Samuel
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Hardy, Laurence (Kent Ashf'd
Mount, William Arthur
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J. (Birm
Harwood, George
Mowbray, Sir Robt. Gray C.
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Murray, Rt Hn A Graham (Bute
Channing, Francis Allston
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry
Chapman, Edward
Heaton, John Henniker
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath
Charrington, Spencer
Helder, Augustus
Newdigate, Francis Alex.
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Hermon-Hodge, Rbt. Trotter
Nicholson, William Graham
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E
Higginbottom, S. W.
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Hill, Arthur
Norman, Henry
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
O'Neill, Hn. Robert Torrens
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Hogg, Lindsay
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield Brightside
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham
Parker, Gilbert
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Hozier, Hon. James H. Cecil
Partington, Oswald
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Paulton, James Mellor
Cranborne, Viscount
Jacoby, James Alfred
Peel, Hn. Wm. Robt. Wellesley
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Cust, Henry John C.
Jessel, Capt. Herb. Merton
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Dalkeith, Earl of
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Pretyman, Ernest George
for Northampton specially objected;or among the members of the Episcopal Bench, to whom the hon. Member for North Monmouth had an even stronger objection.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 233; Noes, 62. (Division List No. 234.)
Purvis, Robert
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S
Quilter, Sir Cuthbert
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Randles, John S.
Smith, H C (Northm'b Tyneside
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan
Rankin, Sir James
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Rasch, Major Fredc. Carne
Smith, Hn. W. F. D. (Strand)
Welby, Sir Chas. G. E. (Notts)
Rea, Russell
Spear, John Ward
Wentworth-Bruce, C. Vernon-
Reid, James (Greenock)
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Wharton, Rt. Hn. John Lloyd
Remnant, James Farquharson
Stevenson, Francis S.
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne
Rentoul, James Alexander
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Stroyan, John
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Taylor, Theodord Cooke
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Robson, William Snowdon
Thomas, Alfred (Glamorgan, E.
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Ropner, Col. Robert
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Round, James
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Young, Commander (Berks, E.
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alex.
Thornton, Percy M.
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Tritton, Charles Ernest
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Ure, Alexander
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick B.)
Valentia, Viscount
Sinclair, Capt. John (Forfarsh
Wallace, Robert
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Gilhooly, James
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Ambrose, Robert
Goddard, Daniel Ford
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Hammond, John
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Bell, Richard
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Malley, William
Blake, Edward
Hope, John Deans (Fife, W.)
O'Mara, James
Boland, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Leamy, Edmund
Power, Patrick Joseph
Burke, E. Haviland-
Levy, Maurice
Reddy, M.
Burns, John
Lloyd-George, David
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Caine, William Sproston
Lundon, W.
Redmond, William (Clare)
Caldwell, James
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Crean, Eugene
M'Dermott, Patrick
Robertson, Edmund (Dundee)
Cremer, William Randal
M'Govern, T.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Cullinan, J.
Mooney, John J.
Sullivan, Donal
Delany, William
Murnaghan, George
Weir, James Galloway
Dilke, Rt. Hn. Sir Charles
Murphy, J.
Whiteley, J. H. (Halifax)
Dillon, John
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Donelan, Captain A.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.
Doogan, P. C.
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Duffy, William J.
O'Brien, K. (Tipperary, Mid.)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Labouchere and Mr. Keir Hardie.
Flavin, Michael Joseph
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Clause 7:;
MR. LABOUCHERE said that in Her late Majesty's Civil List there was a charge for the pensions of her servants, which charge, of course, increased as the reign went on. By this Bill it was proposed to throw £;12,000 per annum;the sum to which these pensions now amounted;upon the Consolidated Fund. It was further proposed to charge upon that Fund the sum of £;13,000 per annum for pensions and retiring allowances to persons connected with the Household of the late Queen, whose services his present Majesty did not require. While admitting the fairness of the latter proposal, he altogether denied that there would be any injustice in charging the £;12,000 upon the King. That sum might be taken generally as the par amount of the
pensions and retiring allowances on the Civil List, and by the proposal of this Bill the sovereign would be relieved for a considerable number of years to the extent of £;12,000 a year. By the Amendment he desired to move, £;12,000 would be taken as the par amount, and if the present sovereign had to grant for retiring allowances and pensions a larger sum, the difference should be thrown upon the Consolidated Fund.
Amendment proposed;
"In page 3, line 14, after the word 'list' to insert the words 'in any year in which the retired allowances granted by His Majesty, and paid as part of the expenditure of his Civil List, exceed twelve thousand pounds.'";(Mr. Labouchere.)
Question proposed, "That those words be there inserted."
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH said the hon. Member for Northampton agreed that it would not be fair to throw upon His Majesty the cost of the pensions of the servants of the late Queen who would now be retired, but for one reason or another he would still impose upon His Majesty the£;12,000 pensions which existed before the death of her late Majesty. It was clear from the Report of the Civil List Committee that His Majesty contemplated considerable economies by the abolition of offices and the reduction of salaries, and to secure that object no doubt in many cases pensions would have to be paid. Accordingly, there would necessarily be a charge for pensions or gratuities quite irrespective of the amount in respect of servants of the late Queen, and if the Amendment of the hon. Member were carried it would be necessary to propose an increase of the Civil List by a corresponding amount. He therefore could not agree to the proposed Amendment.
AYES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Ambrose, Robert
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Bell, Richard
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Malley, William
Blake, Edward
Leamy, Edmund
O'Mara, James
Boland, John
Levy, Maurice
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Lewis, John Herbert
Power, Patrick Joseph
Burke, E. Haviland-
Lundon, W.
Reddy, M.
Burns, John
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Redmond, John E. (Waterford
Caine, William Sproston
M'Dermott, Patrick
Redmond, William (Clare)
Crean, Eugene
M'Govern, T.
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Cremer, William Randal
Mansfield, Horace Rendall
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Cullinan, J.
Mooney, John J.
Sullivan, Donal
Delany, William
Murnaghan, George
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Dillon, John
Murphy, J.
Weir, James Galloway
Donelan, Captain A.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Doogan, P. C.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Duffy, William J.
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Flavin, Michael Joseph
O'Brien, K. (Tipperary, Mid)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr. Labouchere and Mr. Keir Hardie.
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Hammond, John
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
NOES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Banbury, Frederick George
Caldwell, James
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Beach, Rt Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Carlile, William Walter
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Allhusen, Augustus Hy. Eden
Bigwood, James
Cautley, Henry Strother
Allsopp, Hon. George
Black, Alexander William
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbysh.)
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Middlesex)
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Austin, Sir John
Bowles, T Gibson (King's Lynn)
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.)
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Brigg, John
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Worc.
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Broadhurst, Henry
Chapman, Edward
Baldwin, Alfred
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Charrington, Spencer
Balfour, Rt. Hn. A. J. (Manch'r.
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Balfour, Rt. Hn. G. W. (Leeds)
Brymer, William Ernest
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Bull, William James
Coghill, Douglas Harry
MR. KEIR HARDIE said the reason given for the House being asked to take over this liability was that His Majesty proposed to make a number of reductions. In that event there would be a saving of wages, so that not only was the House to be asked to take over the liability which appertained to the Civil List of the pensions of servants as they became due, but His Majesty was to be allowed to make money by dispensing with the services of different people. To argue that the present Civil List was no more than sufficient to meet the outlay of their Majesties without having to bear this £;25,000 a year was carrying the generosity of the nation too far. He intended to support the Amendment of his hon. friend the Member for Northampton.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 58; Noes, 200. (Division List No. 235.)
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham)
Partington, Oswald
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Hozier, Hon. James Hy. Cecil
Peel, Hn. Wm. Robt. Wellesley
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow
Jacoby, James Alfred
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Cranborne, Viscount
Jessel, Captain Herbert Merton
Pretyman, Ernest George
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Purvis, Robert
Davies, Sir Horatio D (Chatham
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H
Randles, John S.
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
Kimber, Henry
Rankin, Sir James
Dewar, T. R (T'rH'mlets, S. Geo.
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Rea, Russell
Doughty, George
Kinloch, Sir John George Smyth
Reid, James (Greenock)
Douglas, Rt. Hon. Akers-
Kitson, Sir James
Remnant, James Farquharson
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Lawson, John Grant
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Dunean, J. Hastings
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Rentoul, James Alexander
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Lee, A. H. (Hants., Fareham
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. Chas. T.
Dyke, Rt. Hon. Sir Wm. H.
Leese, Sir Joseph F (Accrington
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Edwards, Frank
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Leng, Sir John
Round, James
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Sadler, Col. James Alexander
Fenwick, Charles
Long, Rt Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.
Samuel, Harry, S. (Limehouse)
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Sharpe, Wm. Edw. T.
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James (Kent
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Fisher, William Hayes
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Smith, H. C (North'mb, Tynes'e
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Macdona, John Cumming
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Maconochie, A. W.
Spear, John Ward
Flower, Ernest
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Stevenson, Francis S.
Forster, Henry William
M'Iver, Sir L. (Edinburgh, W.)
Stewart, Sir M. J. M'Taggart
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir Henry
Malcolm, Ian
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Garfit, William
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Stroyan, John
Gibbs, Hn. A. G H (City of Lond.
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Thomas, Alfred (Glamorgan, E.
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Meysey-Thompson, Sir M. H.
Thomas, D. Alfred (Merthyr)
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Middlemore, John Throgmort'n
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Grant, Corrie
Morgan, David J. (Walthams'w
Thornton, Percy M.
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Ed'mnds
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Greene, W. Raynond- (Cambs.)
Morrison, James Archibald
Valentia, Viscount
Griffith, Ellis J.
Morton, Arthur H. A (Deptford
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Groves, James Grimble
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Hamilton, Rt. Hn Lord G (Mid'x
Moss, Samuel
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Mount, William Arthur
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir William
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Welby, Lt.-Col A. C. E. (Taun'n)
Harwood, George
Murray, Rt. Hn. A. G. (Bute)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Heaton, John Henniker
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Helder, Augustus
Nicholson, William Graham
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Higginbottom, S. W.
Norman, Henry
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
Hill, Arthur
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Hogg, Lindsay
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Hope, J. F (Sheffield, Brightside
Parker, Gilbert
Clause agreed to.
Clause 8:;
MR. LABOUCHERE moved an Amendment to leave out certain words with the object of providing that Civil List Pensions, which at present amounted to £;1,200 a year, to persons connected with literature and art, should not be charged on the Consolidated Fund, as was proposed, but should henceforth be put upon the Budget for the year. He saw no reason why any exception should be made in the case of these particular pensions. Under the present Bill these pensions
were entirely eliminated from the Civil List. He thought he was right in saying that these pensions were granted by the First Lord of the Treasury, who was a literary man. He would say that in such matters he sat at the feet of the right hon. Gentleman, who was his Gamaliel. It must undoubtedly be a very great trouble and nuisance to the right hon. Gentleman to consider the immense number of applications made for this £;1,200. The right hon. Gentleman would be greatly relieved if he could tell the zealous friends of some applicant that the granting of the pension would cause a bother in the House of Commons,
It was not because he distrusted the right hon. Gentleman that he proposed this change. It was because it was part and parcel of the constitutional system of this country. Even the right hon. Gentleman made a mistake once. He would mention one curious case in this connection. An eminent poet, who was no doubt quite worthy of the position, got a salary on the Civil List as Poet Laureate, but he also got a pension. The hon. Member thought that was wrong. If he got a salary he ought not to be on the pension list. If the Poet Laureate was incapacitated from writing poetry or anything of that sort, and was retired, then he might get a pension, but not otherwise. Under these circumstances, he moved.
Amendment proposed;
"In page 3, line 25, to leave out from the word 'daughters' to the word 'shall' in line 28.";(Mr. Labouchere.)
Question proposed, "That the words proposed to be left out stand part of the Clause."
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: All these pensions are granted by the sovereign on the recommendation of the First Lord of the Treasury. What the hon. Member desires is that the pensions should not be charged on the Consolidated Fund, but on the Estimates for the year. The hon. Member seems to think that the matter will in some way be brought more particularly before the knowledge of Parliament if the pensions are charged on the Votes; but it is possible to challenge the advice given by the First Lord of the Treasury on the Vote for his salary, and there are also other means of raising the matter. Of course, every year a statement of the new pensions which have been granted is published, and from time to time a list of all the persons holding such pensions is laid before Parliament. These pensions could not be treated in the public accounts in the same way as those for ordinary civil servants, because they do not belong to any particular department. There is also another reason; they are of a different nature to ordinary Civil Service pensions because they are granted by the Sovereign, as a matter of grace and
favour, on the advice of a Minister of the Crown. I must say I think it would detract from the grace of such pensions if they were subject to annual discussion in this House;not merely those granted in the course of the year, but also those granted perhaps years ago. I hope the Committee will not change the practice which has been followed for many years.
MR. GIBSON BOWLES said the practice which had been adopted for the last sixty years was not the practice that was now to be adopted. During the last sixty years these pensions had been part of the Civil List itself, and as such were properly charged on the Consolidated Fund; they were now removed from the Civil List. They had ceased to be in their nature a Royal act of bounty, and they had become in reality a part of the money at the disposition of the Minister. The whole theory of the matter was that when money was at the disposal of a Minister he should give an account of it, and it should be put into the Votes of the House and subjected to annual review. That was not the case here. The whole of this money, amounting to £;24,000 or £;25,000 a year, would be at the disposal of the Minister, but it could never appear in any Vote of the House. The only thing capable of being; touched would be the salary of the Minister, which would be a most unsatisfactory substitute. If the First Lord of the Treasury agreed with the Chancellor of the Exchequer that this method was necessary, he would be loth to vote against it; at the same time, he did not think the money disbursed in this manner should be charged on the Consolidated Fund. Of course, there might be an answer to that argument, and if so-he hoped it would be forthcoming.
THE FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY (Mr. A. J. BALFOUR, Manchester, E.): I think I can give my hon. friend reasons for thinking, as he suggests, that this is not really an amount which could be criticised. My hon. friend was under a misapprehension in thinking that there was any change in the system introduced by the Bill. My hon. friend is content with the system which prevailed during the life of the late Queen, but he appears to think there has been some change
in the system which is now proposed, but I think I can show that that is not so. The old system was that the sovereign, on the advice of the Minister, gave certain pensions to persons who were considered to be deserving. The new system is exactly the same. The Minister now, as heretofore, has to consult his sovereign's pleasure as to whether such and such a pension should be given to such and such an individual, so that there is no difference whatever between the system which prevails under the present King and that which prevailed under the late Queen. The whole sum on which the Minister advises the sovereign is an amount of £;1,200, and not £;25,000. It is perfectly true, as the hon. Gentleman who moved the Amendment said, that the administration of this money is not a very agreeable task for the Minister responsible; on the contrary, it is an anxious, laborious, and difficult task; but I believe the expenditure to be useful on the whole, and I am sure its utility would be greatly impaired, if not wholly destroyed, if it were made subject to constant debates in Supply. After all, hon. Members know very well that there are discussions that take place in Supply in which the main interest of the gentlemen who take part in them is not the
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H.
Duncan, J. Hastings
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Carlile, William Wallis
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Dyke, Rt. Hon. Sir William H.
Allhusen, Augustus Hy. Eden
Cautley, Henry Strother
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan
Allsopp, Hon. George
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbysh.)
Fellowes, Hn. Ailwyn Edward
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Fenwick, Charles
Atkinson, Rt. Hn. John
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith
Austin, Sir John
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Finch, George H.
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J. (Birm
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Baldwin, Alfred
Chapman, Edward
Fisher, William Hayes
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Charrington, Spencer
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Flower, Ernest
Banbury, Frederick George
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Forster, Henry William
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H (Bristol)
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Garfit, William
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Gibbs, Hn. A. G. H. (City of Lond
Black, Alexander William
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Cranborne, Viscount
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John E.
Bowles, T. Gibson (King's Lynn)
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Brassey, Albert
Davies, Sir Horatio D (Chatham
Grant, Corrie
Brigg, John
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Broadhurst, Henry
Denny, Colonel
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Groves, James Grimble
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Doughty, George
Hamilton, Rt. Hn. L G (Midd'x
Bull, William James
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Butcher, John George
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir Wm.
acquisition of important truth for the public, or even for themselves, but an interesting interchange of dialectics between the Minister and the Minister's critics. That is all very well in purely public affairs, but when we come to the financial position of widows and orphans, and the comparative claims of different men of letters or science, the case is different. Then, I think, we should have a personal element, which this House would not be anxious to discuss, but which, if it cropped up in the ordinary course of debate, we should be obliged to discuss, which would be almost a misfortune, necessitating the alteration of the whole practice, which would not then be constitutional. It would be a great change to have these pensions granted, not by the sovereign on the advice of the Minister, but by the Minister in the ordinary course of his ministerial duties. That is not a change which I would recommend, and I would urge the House not to accept it. I would strongly urge the retention of the old system.
Question put.
The Committee divided:;Ayes, 221; Noes, 71. (Division List No. 236.)
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Royds, Clement Molyneux
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Heaton, John Henniker
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Helder, Augustus
Morgan, D. J. (Walthams'w)
Seton-Karr, Henry
Hermon-Hodge, Robert T.
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Higginbottom, S. W.
Morrison, James Archibald
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Hill, Arthur
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Morton, E. J. C. (Devonport)
Smith, H C (North'mb Tyneside
Hogg, Lindsay
Mount, William Arthur
Smith, Jas. Parker (Lanarks.)
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightsd.
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Smith, Hon. F. W. D. (Strand)
Horniman, Frederick John
Murray, Rt. Hn A Graham (Bute
Spear, John Ward
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Stevenson, Francis S.
Hozier, Hon. James Henry C.
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Myers, William Henry
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Jacoby, James Alfred
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Strachey, Edward
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Nicholson, William Graham
Stroyan, John
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H.
Norman, Henry
Thomas, Alfred (Glamorgan, E.
Kenyon, Hon. Geo. T. (Denbigh)
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Kimber, Henry
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Thornton, Percy M.
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Tollemache, Henry James
Kinloch, Sir John George S.
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Kitson, Sir James
Parker, Gilbert
Valentia, Viscount
Lawson, John Grant
Parkes, Ebenezer
Walker, Col. William Hall
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Partington, Oswald
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Lee, Arthur H (Hants, Fareham
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington
Peel, Hn. Wm Robert Wellesley
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan)
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Pilkington, Lieut.-Col. Richard
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Leng, Sir John
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts)
Levy, Maurice
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John Lloyd
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Pretyman, Ernest George
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Long, Rt Hn Walter (Bristol, S.)
Purvis, Robert
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Randles, John S.
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Rankin, Sir James
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Lowther, Rt. Hn. James (Kent)
Rasch, Major Frederic Carne
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsm'th)
Rea, Russell
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Macdona, John Cumming
Reid, James (Greenock)
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh, N.)
Maconochie, A. W.
Remnant, James Farquharson
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
M'Iver, Sir Lewis (Edinburgh W
Rentoul, James Alexander
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
M'Laren, Charles Benjamin
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
Majendie, James A. H.
Ropner, Colonel Robert
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Malcolm, Ian
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel Walter
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Round, James
NOES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Ambrose, Robert
Griffith, Ellis J.
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Atherley-Jones, L.
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Bell, Richard
Hammond, John
O'Kelly, J. (Roscommon, N.)
Blake, Edward
Harwood, George
O'Malley, William
Boland, John
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Mara, James
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Burke, E. Haviland-
Kennedy, Patrick James
Power, Patrick Joseph
Burns, John
Leamy, Edmund
Price, Robert John
Caine, William Sproston
Lewis, John Herbert
Reddy, M.
Caldwell, James
Lundon, W.
Redmond, J. E. (Waterford)
Cameron, Robert
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Redmond, William (Clare)
Channing, Francis Allston
M'Dermott, Patrick
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Cogan, Denis J.
M'Govern, T.
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Crean, Eugene
Mansfield, Horace Rendall
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Cremer, William Randal
Mooney, John J.
Sullivan, Donal
Cullinan, J.
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Delany, William
Moss, Samuel
Weir, James Galloway
Dillon, John
Murnaghan, George
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Donelan, Captain A.
Murphy, John
Wilson, H. J. (York, W. R.)
Doogan, P. C.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Yoxall, James Henry
Duffy, William J.
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.)
Edwards, Frank
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Labouchere and Mr. Keir Hardie.
Flavin, Michael Joseph
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Md
Flynn, James Christopher
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Clause agreed to.
Bill reported, without Amendment; to be read the third time to-morrow.
DEMISE OF THE CROWN BILL.
[THIRD READING.]
Order for Third Reading read.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the Bill be now read the third time."
MR. DILLON: Before this Bill is read the third time I would state once more the cause and purpose of this Bill. It is introduced for the purpose of relieving Ministers from the unpleasant position in which they find themselves through continuing to sit and vote in this House after having taken an office of profit under the Crown. You might search the whole of the precedents of this House and not find a case of this kind. If it were desirable to make a change in the established practice of the House of Commons requiring Members of the House who accept an office of profit under the Crown to go to their constituents, and take their views upon their conduct, the alteration should be made under such circumstances as would relieve Ministers from all suggestion that it was made in their personal interest. For my part I do not agree with the view that has been expressed
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex F.
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J (Birm.
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Allhusen, Augustus Henry E.
Chapman, Edward
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Allsopp, Hon. George
Charrington, Spencer
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Flower, Ernest
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Forster, Henry William
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Garfit, William
Austin, Sir John
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Gibbs, Hn. A. G. H. (City of Lond
Bain, Col. James Robert
Colston, Chas. Edw. H. Athole
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Gorst, Rt Hn. Sir John Eldon
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Balfour, Rt. Hon. G. W. (Leeds)
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Balfour, Major K. R. (Christch.
Craig, Robert Hunter
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Banbury, Frederick George
Cranborne, Viscount
Griffith, Ellis J.
Beach, Rt. Hn. W. W. B. (Hants
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Groves, James Grimble
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Dalkeith, Earl of
Hamilton, Rt Hn Ld. G. (Midd'x
Blundell, Col. Henry
Davies, Sir Horatio D (Chatham
Hanbury, Rt. Hn. Rbt. Wm.
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan
Harris, Fredk. Leverton
Bowles, T. Gibson (King's Lynn
Denny, Colonel
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Brassey, Albert
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Heaton, John Henniker
Brodrick, Rt. Hn. St. John
Doughty, George
Helder, Augustus
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Bull, William James
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Higginbottom, S. W.
Butcher, John George
Dunn, Sir William
Hill, Arthur
Carlile, William Walter
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Dyke, Rt. Hn. Sir William Hart
Hogg, Lindsay
Cautley, Henry Strother
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield Brightside
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Finch, George H.
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Hozier, Hon. James Henry Cecil
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Fisher, William Hayes
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
from the Treasury Bench that the old practice had better be swept away altogether, and that Ministers should be allowed to accept an office of profit under the Crown without having to go to their constituencies afterwards. That might be a reasonable view to take for altering the practice of Parliament in the future, but that is quite a different thing to introducing a measure to relieve Ministers from a difficulty. It cannot be denied, to put it at the lowest, that there is a degree of uncertainty as to whether the Ministers could not be proceeded against, and penalties recovered from them, for sitting in this House. The Attorney General admitted that, and stated that one of the objects of this Bill was to remove the risk that existed that a court of law might take a different view to that which he expressed. If that means anything it means that this measure is introduced for the purpose of relieving Ministers from the risk of a decision of a court of law that they were sitting in this House when they had no right to do so. For these reasons I shall divide the House on the Third Reading.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 199; Noes, 109. (Division List No. 237.)
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Murray, Rt. Hn. A. G. (Bute)
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Kennaway, Rt. Hn. Sir John H.
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Smith, H C (North'mb., T'neside
Kenyon, Hn. Geo. T. (Denbigh)
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Smith, James P. (Lanarks.)
Kenyon, James (Lancs, Bury)
Myers, William Henry
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand)
Kimber, Henry
Newdigate, Francis Alex.
Spear, John Ward
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Nicholson, William Graham
Stanley, Edward J. (Somerset)
Lambton, Hon. Frederick W.
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Stewart, Sir M. J. M'Taggart
Lawson, John Grant
Norman, Henry
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Lee, A. H. (Hants., Fareham
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Stroyan, John
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Thomas, A. (Glamorgan, E.)
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Long, Rt. Hn. W. (Bristol, S.)
Parker, Gilbert
Thornton, Percy M.
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Parkes, Ebenezer
Tollemache, Henry James
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Peel, Rt. Hn. Wm. Robert W.
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Lowther, Rt. Hon. J. (Kent)
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Valentia, Viscount
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Walker, Col. William Hall
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Macdona, John Cumming
Pretyman, Ernest George
Warr, Augustus Frederick-
Maconochie, A. W.
Purvis, Robert
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Randles, John S.
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
M'Calmont, Col. H. L. B (Cambs
Rankin, Sir James
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
M'Iver, Sir L. (Edinburgh, W.
Rasch, Maj. Frederic Carne
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John L.
M'Laren, Charles Benjamin
Reid, James (Greenock)
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Majendie, James A. H.
Remnant, James Farquharson
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Rentoul, James Alexander
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Meysey Thompson, Sir H. M.
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. Charles T.
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh., N.
Milner, Rt. Hon. Sir Fred. G.
Ropner, Col. Robert
Wilson-Todd, W. H. (Yorks.)
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel W.
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow
Round, James
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Morris, Hon. Martin H. F.
Royds, Clement Molyneux
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
Morrison, James Archibald
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Moss, Samuel
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Mount, William Arthur
Sharpe, William Edward T.
NOES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Hammond, John
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Hardie, J. Keir (Merthyr Tydvil
O'Malley, William
Ambrose, Robert
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Mara, James
Atherley-Jones, L.
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Bell, Richard
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
Partington, Oswald
Black, Alexander William
Horniman, Frederick John
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
Blake, Edward
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Boland, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
Price, Robert Joseph
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Kinloch, Sir John George Smyth
Rea, Russell
Brigg, John
Kitson, Sir James
Reddy, M.
Broadhurst, Henry
Lambert, George
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Burke, E. Haviland-
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Redmond, William (Clare)
Burns, John
Leamy, Edmund
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Burt, Thomas
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Caine, William Sproston
Leng, Sir John
Robertson, Edmund (Dundee)
Caldwell, James
Levy, Maurice
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick, B.)
Cameron, Robert
Lewis, John Herbert
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Chonning, Francis Allston
Lloyd-George, David
Sinclair, Capt. John (Forfarsh.)
Cogan, Denis J.
Lundon, W.
Stevenson, Francis S.
Crean, Eugene
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Strachey, Edward
Cremer, William Randal
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Sullivan, Donal
Cullinan, J.
M'Dermott, Patrick
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Delany, William
M'Govern, T.
Thomas, David Alfr'd (Merthyr
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.
M'Kenna, Reginald
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
Dillon, John
Mansfield, Horace Rendall
Thomas, J A (Glamorg'n, Gower
Doogan, P. C.
Mooney, John J.
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Duffy, William J.
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.
Duncan, J. Hastings
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan
Edwards, Frank
Murnaghan, George
Weir, James Galloway
Evans, S. T. (Glamorgan)
Murphy, John
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Fenwick, Charles
Nolan, Col. John P (Galway, N.
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Yoxall, James Henry
Flynn, James Christopher
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, Kendal (T'pp'rary Mid
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Captain Donelan and Mr. Patrick O'Brien.
Goddard, Daniel Ford
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Grant, Corrie
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Bill read the third time, and passed.
LARCENY BILL.
[SECOND READING.]
Order for Second Reading read.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the Bill be now read a second time."
MR. CALDWELL (Lanarkshire, Mid) said that this Bill was by no means a large Bill on paper, but it contained very important changes in the law of England, particularly in regard to larceny. The Bill had arisen out of recent prosecutions of solicitors in England for misappropriations of money, and there was always a danger that when a change of the law was made on account of a specific grievance it might injuriously affect other cases which were not intended to fall under the change in the law. Last year there was a great rush to pass a Bill on this subject. The late Attorney General brought it in, and all that it proposed to do was to leave out the words "in writing" from a section in the existing Larceny Act. That would have affected the proof of the charge rather than the constitution of the crime. He had taken upon himself to move the rejection of the Bill, and the present Attorney General eventually withdrew it. In introducing the present Bill, the hon. and learned Gentleman condemned last year's Bill in the most violent terms, because, as he himself had shown, that Bill, instead of improving the law, made bad law worse. That showed the importance of not rushing Bills through the House at the end of a session, but of having them carefully considered. He did not object to a particular form of amending the law, and preventing crime in every possible way, but the amendment should be so carried out as to fulfil the purpose of the change in the law, without involving matters and crimes not intended to be dealt with. In England it was the essence of larceny or theft that there should be a wrongous taking of an article. There were other cases which were of the nature of theft, but these had been dealt with by the Legislature by statutory enactment, as, for instance, the case of clerks and servants who had been entrusted with the property of their masters, and who
had appropriated it. Then there were the cases of bankers, solicitors, factors, and agents who were entrusted with property or money to be applied to a particular purpose, but who did not so apply it. That was made criminal by statutory enactment. Further, there was the case of carriers, and also the case of bailees, the appropriation of the goods entrusted to whom was not larceny by the common law of England, and it had to be made a civil offence by statutory enactment.
The object of this Bill was apparently to make a new definition altogether of crime, and to sweep into the net everything that was of the nature of a criminal offence. In that respect there was a great deal to be said in favour of the Bill. It left to the judge and jury to determine, after hearing the whole case, how far there had been fraudulent conversion of the money. That altered a little the phraseology of the Larceny Act of 1861, and they might reasonably allow a sweeping in of everything in the nature of criminal offence. He himself did not see any particular reason for Sub-section b of Clause 1. for it dealt with a different category of cases from those dealt with under Sections 75 and 76 of the. Larceny Act of 1861. He would like to know the effect of the Bill on cases where money had been found, and on that other class of cases to which he had already referred, namely, clerks and servants. He thought, from the definition given in the first clause, that it would apply to clerks and servants who were now dealt with under the existing Larceny Act. They would then have this anomaly, that there would be two procedures for the same offence. The same thing applied to bailees. Further, would the Bill sweep away existing enactments against carriers and bring them all under this Bill? He suggested that it would have been better to have made all these cases fall under the class of theft and made them part of the common law. By doing so they would get rid of a great many technicalities in procedure. When they made new statutory crimes the door was open to any amount of interpretation by the judges.
He thought the Attorney General would do well to re-consider the matter
between now and the Committee stage as to whether it would not be advisable to follow the recommendation of the Legal Commission of 1878. He did not see why under Sub-section 2 of Clause 1 any exception should be made in regard to trustees or mortgagees. It should be left to the judge and jury to say whether there had been fraudulent misapplication of the money by the trustee or mortgagee, and if there had been fraudulent misapplication why should they be protected? Then why was the proviso in the earlier Act in regard to lien excluded from the present measure? and why also was the clause in the Commissioners' Report of 1878, to the effect that where the subject-matter resolved itself into a matter of accounting the Act was not to apply;why was that proviso not introduced into the present Bill, when they went out of their way to introduce the proviso as regards trustees and mortgagees? At the same time, he did not propose to oppose the Second Reading. He quite recognised that a change in the law was necessary, and that there were anomalies in England that should be removed. At present the criminal law only applied to certain specified persons, and he quite approved of its being extended to, for instance, auctioneers who sold property and did not account for the money. In all such cases the principle was right, but he thought that the Attorney General was hardly carrying out the object he had in view by setting up new statutory crimes.
*MR. WARR (Liverpool, E. Toxteth) said that the Bill was a vast improvement on the Bill of last session. It was simple, comprehensive, and intelligible. He associated himself with what the hon. Gentleman opposite had said with regard to Sub-section 2. No doubt what he had said would receive consideration from the Attorney General. There was a section in the Larceny Act dealing with misappropriation by trustees, but under that section it was necessary first to get the fiat of the Attorney General, and secondly the certificate of a judge of a civil court, in case the offence had come to light in the course of civil proceedings. There was no objection to these safeguards as regarded frauds under wills and settle-
ments, but he was not so sure that there would not be a good deal of objection to them in dealing with frauds by trustees arising out of commercial transactions. He would put a case to the Attorney General. The course of business between banker and customer in business centres with which he was acquainted, though it might not apply to London, was that after an advance had been made by the banker upon the security of produce pledged with him by the customer, it was entrusted by the banker to an agent whether the customer himself or someone else, for sale on the bank's account upon the written terms that the proceeds were to be paid to the banker as and when received. The agent was thus constituted a trustee, and the provisions of the Bill applicable would apply to such a transaction. If there was misappropriation of proceeds the banker could take no criminal proceedings without the fiat of the Attorney General, and in certain cases without the consent of the judge who tried the civil action. Before these consents had been obtained the customer might have left the country. That was an illustration of the kind of case which indicated that the Bill might by amendments be perhaps made more useful. He hoped the matter would be very carefully considered, but he himself was inclined at present to think that the sub-section might well be omitted altogether.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Sir ROBERT FINLAY, Inverness Burghs) said that everyone would agree with what had been said by the hon. Member for Mid Lanark, that the subject was one of very great importance. The Report of the Commission which the hon. Gentleman quoted proposed to remodel the law of theft, but he would point out to the hon. Gentleman that that would involve a very extensive and difficult enterprise. Without undertaking an enterprise so ambitious, they were content to remove the blots upon that portion of the law which dealt with the offence of misappropriation by persons entrusted with property by others. Sections 75 and 76 of the Act of 1861 were open to very serious objections. No reason could be given for the necessity for directions in writing, particularly in the case of misappropriation by solicitors, with whom
it often rested to say whether directions should be given in writing or not. That provision was one which often prevented justice being done. Again, no good reason could be given for the state of the law which declared that only agents by profession should be amenable to the provisions of the sections. The hon. Member for Mid Lanark referred to the fact that the Bill contained a proviso that any person receiving property for another might be guilty of a misdemeanour if he fraudulently misapplied that property. He quite agreed that the keynote of the whole Bill was to be found in the word "fraudulent." But he would further point out that the mere fact that property belonged to another person would not bring it within the words, "received any property for or on account of any other person." The effect of the Bill would be to bring agents to receive as well as agents to pay within the scope of the criminal law if guilty of fraud in respect of property they had received. The hon. Member pointed out that a question might arise if a defendant had been guilty of conduct which rendered him liable to prosecution under other provisions of the criminal law. But that was dealt with in the Interpretation Act of 1899, Section 33 providing that, where an act constituted an offence under one or more Acts or under common law, the offender should be liable to be prosecuted under either or all of the Acts or at common law so long as he was not punished twice for the same offence. Various other criticisms were made by the hon. Gentleman, the importance of which he recognised, and which no doubt would form the subject of consideration in Committee. He was much struck with what the hon. Gentleman had said as to the omission of the proviso with regard to the disposal of property under any lien or charge. He would point out to the hon. Gentleman that that proviso was absolutely unnecessary. It was contained in Section 75 of the Larceny Act of 1861, but it was not wanted there, and still less would it be wanted in the present Bill, under which no man would be liable unless he acted fraudulently. The hon. Gentleman and also his hon. friend referred to the provision exempting trustees and mortgagees from the operation of the Bill. The House ought to know that that provision was taken from
the analogous section of the Act of 1861. With regard to mortgagees it was originally inserted on the ground that as the mortgagee was the owner of the property it would be hard, if a dispute arose between him and the mortgagor, that the latter should be at liberty to take criminal proceedings. Certainly more mature consideration would be required before they undertook to enlarge the criminal law further in that direction, but no doubt the clause would receive consideration in Committee. With regard to the cases to which his hon. friend more particularly referred, any trustee under an instrument in writing who fraudulently misapplied property was liable to prosecution under the law as it stood. His hon. friend said that certain conditions had to be complied with by the prosecutor, but they were not at all onerous. If civil proceedings were entered on, it was very proper that the certificate of the judge should be obtained that the case was one suitable for criminal prosecution, and if it were suitable there would be no difficulty about obtaining a certificate. The other condition was that the fiat of the Attorney General should be obtained for a prosecution. He did not think that any difficulty or delay would be occasioned by that condition, while the necessity of obtaining the fiat of the law officers was some security against improper claims being put forward. No doubt the whole subject deserved and would receive full consideration in Committee. It should always be remembered that there was danger of the criminal law being applied, or rather misapplied, for the purpose of enforcing a civil liability, and care should be taken that in preventing the escape of rogues, honest men were not laid open to vexatious charges. He desired to express his appreciation of the spirit in which the Bill had been received, and he could assure hon. Members that every suggestion in Committee would receive the fullest consideration.
MR. ASQUITH (Fifeshire, E.) said he did not quite understand what the Attorney General had said with reference to trustees.
SIR ROBERT FINLAY said that trustees were specially provided for in
the third section of the Larceny Act of 1861, with which the Bill was intended to be read. That Act provided for the prosecution of any fraudulent trustee, but it was considered proper to introduce precautions, because after all the trustee was the legal owner of the property, and it was desirable that he should not be exposed to improper claims without some precaution.
MR. ASQUITH said that was quite satisfactory.
Question put, and agreed to.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the Bill be committed to the Standing Committee on Law, etc.";(Sir Robert Finlay.)
MR. CALDWELL said he hoped the Attorney General would allow some time, say three weeks, to elapse in order that the matter might be properly considered.
SIR ROBERT FINLAY said that having regard to the state of the session he thought three weeks rather too long. That might imperil the Bill, but at any rate some time would be allowed.
Question put, and agreed to.
BERWICKSHIRE COUNTY TOWN BILL [Lords].
[SECOND READING.]
Order for Second Reading read.
THE LORD ADVOCATE (Mr. A. GRAHAM MURRAY, Buteshire) said that the Bill was an entirely non-controversial measure introduced by the Government at the request of the county authorities in Berwickshire, who unanimously desired that the seat of county government should be changed from Greenlaw to Duns. The present arrangement was found exceedingly inconvenient.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the Bill be now read a second time."
MR. DILLON asked, if the Bill were non-controversial, why the hon. Member
for Berwickshire was not present to support it. It was a very important measure, and he had received communications from persons in the county begging him to oppose it. The only reason why he was approached on the matter was that on one occasion he addressed a meeting at Greenlaw in support of the hon. Member for Berwickshire, and some of the hon. Member's constituents had written him stating that the people of Greenlaw were strongly opposed to the Bill. The Lord Advocate stated that the Bill had the support of the county authorities. Did they include the people of Greenlaw?
MR. A. GRAHAM MURRAY said he was not aware that the people of Green-law were a county authority. He used the word in the ordinary sense.
MR. DILLON said he thought it was rather a large order to ask the House of Commons to pass a Bill of this kind without some clearer proof of the desire of the county than the bald statement of the Lord Advocate. For all they knew the change might have only been carried by a narrow majority of the county council. In the absence of a more convincing statement he should certainly divide the House against the Bill. Greenlaw had been the county town of Berwickshire since 1696, and the House ought to be given a more reasonable explanation before it was asked to disturb an arrangement which had existed for two centuries.
MR. FLYNN (Cork, N.) said it was extraordinary that such a Bill should have been brought forward as a Government measure at a comparatively early hour when much more important work might be transacted. He hoped that the old traditions connected with one of the most important and interesting parts of the Border would not be broken down without some more reasonable and valid explanation. He knew the country well, and he could not conceive why Duns should be selected as the county town rather than Greenlaw. The Lord Advocate said that certain county authorities had expressed a desire for the change, but the House had not heard the opinion of other local bodies regarding it. It was a significant fact that the hon. Member for
Berwickshire was not present. If the hon. Gentleman had been strongly in support of the measure he would have been present to have given his representative blessing to it. No adequate reason had been given why an arrangement which had existed for over two centuries should now be changed. They had only had a few words from an ill-informed Lord Advocate, who thought, forsooth, that because a certain Bill was starred, therefore it ought to be accepted by the House without any information regarding it being given. It did not matter to him a twopenny ticket whether Duns or Greenlaw was to be the county town. He was impartial, but the question was what did the people of the district concerned think of the change? The hon. Member for the division was probably embarrassed between new claims and existing claims, and had therefore left the House. He did not blame the hon. Member, and he could quite understand other hon. Members being in equally embarrassing positions if similar Bills affecting their constituencies were brought forward. Was it reasonable to ask the House of Commons, which was already up to its neck in business, to make such a change as was proposed by the Bill without any explanation? They had no idea of the relative importance of Greenlaw and Duns, and he did not think that the House of Commons would be justified in destroying the status of an old commerical town without more adequate reasons. He hoped, therefore, that the House would resist the motion.
*CAPTAIN BALFOUR (Middlesex, Hornsey) said he acknowledged that the hon. Member for North Cork had a considerable knowledge of Berwickshire, as the hon. Member was through it when he was contesting the county against the present Member. As a member of the Berwickshire County Council he desired to put before the House the Berwickshire side of the question, and he was sure that hon. Gentlemen opposite would agree with the principle of Home Rule for Berwickshire. It was true that Greenlaw had a record of 200 years, but Duns went back further still, for it was the old county town, before Greenlaw by the influence of the Earls of Marchmont was made the county town in
1696. They would be very well content to have Greenlaw still for their county town, were it not for the fact that Duns was now the natural centre and the most important town in the county. The only people likely to object to Duns would be the legal element, who had still to meet at Greenlaw under the existing Act. But owing to the fact that the bulk of the members of the legal profession now lived in Duns, they were equally unanimous with the county council in desiring that the business should be conducted in future at Duns instead of Greenlaw. He hoped the House would accept this statement from one who, although he did not represent Berwickshire, lived in the county and knew something about the district. He had talked the matter over with the hon. Member for Berwickshire; they were in absolute agreement upon this point, and he presumed it was only through some unfortunate accident that the hon. Member was not present to support the Bill.
MR. WEIR (Ross and Cromarty) was extremely disappointed that the Lord Advocate had not made the House better acquainted with the object of the Bill. It was also very extraordinary that at a time when there was so much urgent business of a far more important character, to the consideration of which the House might devote its time, a miserable measure of this kind should be brought forward. He was inclined to think this was a landlord's Bill, but sufficient information had not been given to enable Members to judge whether or not they should vote for the Second Reading. It was surprising that the hon. Member for Berwickshire was not present either to support the Bill or to defend his county. Certainly if it had been a Bill affecting Ross-shire he (the speaker) would have been in his place to give the House all the information in his possession.
MR. JAMES O'CONNOR (Wicklow, W.) inferred that this Bill was the outcome of a contest between the Greenlaws and the Dunses, and having listened to the speeches which had been delivered he had decided to vote for the Greenlaws against the Dunses.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 271; Noes, 56. (Division List No. 238.)
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Keswick, William
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Langley, Batty
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Doughty, George
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Lawson, John Grant
Allhusen, Augustus Henry E.
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Duncan, J. Hastings
Lee, Arthur H. (Hants., Fareh'm
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington)
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Emmott, Alfred
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Fellowes, Hn. Ailwyn Edward
Lewis, John Herbert
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Fielden, Edward Brocklehurst
Lockwood, Lt-Col. A. R.
Asquith, Rt. Hon. Herbert H.
Finch, George H.
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Atkinson, Rt. Hon John
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Long, Rt. Hon. Walter (Bristol, S
Austin, Sir John
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Fisher, William Hayes
Lowe, Francis William
Balfour, Rt Hon. A J. (Manch'r)
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Balfour, Rt Hon. G. W. (Leeds)
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Balfour, Maj. K R (Christchurch
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Macdona, John Cumming
Banbury, Frederick George
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Maconochie, A. W.
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Forster, Henry William
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M.
Garfit, William
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall
Bigwood, James
Gibbs, Hn. A. G. H. (City of Lond.
M'Calmont, H. L. B. (Cambs.),
Bill, Charles
Gladstone, Rt Hn. Herbert John
M'Crae, George
Black, Alexander William
Goddard, Daniel Ford
M'Iver, Sir Lewis (Edinburgh, W
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
M'Laren, Charles Benjamin
Bond, Edward
Gorst, Rt. Hn. Sir John Eldon
Majendie, James A. H.
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Brassey, Albert
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.)
Brigg, John
Graham, Henry Robert
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Milner, Rt. Hon. Sir Frederick G.
Brymer, William Ernest
Green, Walford D. (Wednesbury
Milton, Viscount
Burns, John
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S. Edm'nds
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Butcher, John George
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Caldwell, James
Gretton, John
Moon, Edward Robert Pacy
Campbell-Bannerman, Sir H.
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Morgan, David J (Walthamstow
Carlile, William Walter
Griffith, Ellis J.
Morgan, Hn. Fred. (Monm'thsh.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Groves, James Grimble
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen
Cautley, Henry Strother
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Morrell, George Herbert
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbyshire
Hain, Edward
Morrison, James Archibald
Cawley, Frederick
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G (Midd'x
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Hamilton, Marq of (L'nd'nderry
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Davonport)
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Moss, Samuel
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J. (Birm.
Hardy, Laurence, (Kent, Ashf'd
Moulton, John Fletcher
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Worc'r
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Mount, William Arthur
Channing, Francis Allston
Haslam, Sir Alfred S.
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Chapman, Edward
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Murray Rt Hn A. Graham (Bute
Charrington, Spencer
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Heath, James Staffords, N. W.)
Myers, William Henry
Clare, Octavius Leigh
Heaton, John Henniker
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Helder, Augustus
Nicholson, William Graham
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Herman-Hodge, Robert Trotter
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Higginbottom, S. W.
Norman, Henry-
Colomb, Sir John Charles Ready
Hogg, Lindsay
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Holland, William Henry
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
Parker, Gilbert
Cox, Irwin Edward Bainbridge
Horniman, Frederick John
Parkes, Ebenezer
Craig, Robert Hunter
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
Partington, Oswald
Cranborne, Viscount
Hozier, Hon. James Henry Cecil
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
Crossley, Sir Savile
Hutton, John (Yorks, N. R.)
Peel, Hn. Wm. Robert Wellesley
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Jebb, Sir Richard Claverhouse
Penn, John
Dalkeith, Earl of
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Percy, Earl
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Jones, William (Carnarvonshire
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Davies, Sir Horatio D. (Chatham
Kearley, Hudson E.
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.)
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop)
Pretyman, Ernest George
Price, Robert John
Shaw-Stewart, M. H. (Renfrew)
Walker, Col. William Hall
Priestley, Arthur
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Purvis, Robert
Sinclair, Capt John (Forfarshire
Wason, John C. (Orkney)
Pym, C. Guy
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Welby, Lt.-Col. A. C. E. (Taunton
Randles, John S.
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.)
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts.)
Rankin, Sir James
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand)
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Rasch, Major Frederic Carrie
Soames, Arthur Wellesley
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Rea, Russell
Spear, John Ward
Whiteley, George (York, W. R.)
Reid, James (Greenock)
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C. R (Northants
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Remnant, James Farquharson
Stanley, Edward Jas. (Somerset
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Richards, Henry Charles
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Williams, Colonel R. (Dorset)
Ridley, Hon. M. W. (Stalybridge)
Stevenson, Francis S.
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green)
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. Chas Thomson
Strachey, Edward
Wilson, A. Stanley (York, E. R.)
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Stroyan, John
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Robson, William Snowdon
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Thomas, David A. (Merthyr)
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh, N.)
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel Walter
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings)
Wodehouse, Rt. Hon. E. R. (Bath)
Round, James
Thomas, J A (Glamorgan, Gow'r
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Royds, Clement Molyneux
Thomson, F. W. (York, W. R.)
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Thornton, Percy M.
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Tollemache, Henry James
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Seely, Chalres Hilton (Lincoln)
Ure, Alexander
Seton-Karr, Henry
Valentia, Viscount
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick B.)
Vincent, Col. Sir C. E H (Sheffield
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.)
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Ambrose, Robert
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.)
Bell, Richard
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Boland, John
Lambert, George
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N.
Broadhurst, Henry
Leamy, Edmund
O'Malley, William
Burke, E. Haviland-
Levy, Maurice
O'Mara, James
Caine, William Sproston
Lloyd-George, David
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Cogan, Denis J.
Lundon, W.
Power, Patrick Joseph
Crean, Eugene
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Reckitt, Harold James
Cremer, William Randal
MacDermott, Patrick
Reddy, M.
Cullinan, J.
M'Govern, T.
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Delany, William
Mansfield, Horace Rendall
Redmond, William (Clare)
Donelan, Captain A.
Mooney, John J.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Doogan, P. C.
Murnaghan, George
Sullivan, Donal
Duffy, William J.
Murphy, John
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Yoxall, James Henry
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.)
Flynn, James Christopher
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Dillon and Mr. Weir.
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary, Mid
Hammond, John
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Bill read a second time, and committed for to-morrow.
PURCHASE OF LAND (IRELAND) BILL.
Read a second time, and committed for to-morrow.
SUPPLY [7TH JUNE] REPORT.
Resolutions reported.
REVENUE DEPARTMENTS ESTIMATES, 1901&#x2013;2.
1. "That a sum, not exceeding £;1,221,713, be granted to His Majesty to complete the sum necessary to defray the Charge which will come in course of
payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902, for the Salaries and Expenses of the Inland Revenue Department."
2. "That a sum, not exceeding £;5,528,810, be granted to His Majesty, to complete the sum necessary to defray the Charge which will come in course of payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902, for the salaries and Expenses of the Post Office Services, the Expenses of Post Office Savings Banks, and Government Annuities and Insurances, and the Collection of the Post Office Revenue."
3. "That a sum, not exceeding £;571,085, be granted to His Majesty, to
complete the sum necessary to defray the charge which will come in course of payment during the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902, for the Expenses of the Post Office Packet Service."
Resolutions read a second time.
First resolution:;
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That this House doth agree with the Committee in the said resolution."
MR. O'MARA (Kilkenny, S.) said it was frequently urged that the expenditure of money in Ireland compensated that country for the large revenue derived from her, but on looking through the Estimates that appeared not to be the case. The amount collected for Excise was about the same in Ireland as in Scotland, but the expenses of collection were about twice as much in Scotland as in Ireland. The salaries of assistant supervisors and first-class officers amounted to £;105,000 in Scotland, but to only £;46,000 in Ireland. The total cost of collecting the Excise in Scotland was £;184,812, as against £;93,868 in Ireland, while the numbers of officials employed in the two countries were 882 and 433 respectively. Moreover, in Scotland, the average amount of the salaries paid was much higher than in Ireland. If the officials in the latter country were as efficient as those in Scotland, why was not their pay the same? Another point to which he desired to direct attention was the amount of the rewards paid to the Royal Irish Constabulary for detecting persons engaged in illicit distillation in Ireland. While 1,800 illicit stills were discovered in Ireland, only two were discovered in Scotland. When on a previous occasion the hon. Member for East Mayo asked the amount of these rewards he was told that it was only a few pounds, but the sum taken in the Estimates was £;3,000. That was a very great encouragement for the discovery of illicit stills, and he suggested that a large proportion of the discoveries in Ireland were manufactured for the sake of the reward.
MR. DILLON: I think the figures quoted by the hon. Member for South Kilkenny require some explanation. On
Friday night last I pointed out that in Scotland there were 129 distilleries at work as compared with 30 or 35 in Ireland, and yet in the course of last year only five illicit stills were discovered in Scotland as against 1,865 in Ireland. These figures are very difficult to understand. Living in Ireland as I do, and knowing that seizures for illicit distilling are very rare, I was astounded at these figures, and asked the Financial Secretary the amount of the rewards paid to the members of the Royal Irish Constabulary for effecting these seizures. He told me that it was something very trifling, and that the sums ranged from 5s. to £;1 or £;2, while for very large seizures the amount was higher.
THE FINANCIAL SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY (Mr. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN, Worcestershire, E.): May I interrupt the hon. Gentleman in order to correct a misapprehension? In the amount that I gave I spoke not of the whole sum, but of the rewards given in individual cases. I spoke of them as ranging from 5s. to some pounds in important cases. Since then I have made inquiries, and I find that the normal reward in Ireland is £;2 in each case.
MR. DILLON: I suppose that is the minimum. The amount in the Estimates is £;3,000 for this year, which is an increase of £;500 over last year. I do submit that some explanation and inquiry is called for in regard to the number of seizures for illicit distillation in Ireland. It is ludicrous to tell this House that there are only five cases of illicit distillation in Scotland as against 800 cases in Ireland. There must be some reason to account for this extraordinary condition of things. It is absurd to tell us at the opening of the twentieth century that the seizures for illicit distillation in Ireland are increasing, when we have in that country the most idle and the most unoccupied police in the world. The police of Ireland are kicking their heels all day with nothing to do, except when they are summoning people for illicit distillation. It is positively ludicrous to state that in Ireland, where the police are three or four times more numerous than in Scotland, you are unable to put an end to this illicit distillation, which is said to be growing to an alarming
extent. I believe that the figure given is a bogus one in regard to seizures for illicit distillation.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: The question raised by the hon. Member for East Mayo, which was also raised the other night, is one which requires serious consideration. Having had my attention drawn to the matter I at once communicated with the Board of Inland Revenue on the subject, and I agree with the hon. Gentleman who spoke last that the present condition of affairs is serious, and that the explanation I have to offer is not a sufficient one. I propose to go into the matter with the Chairman of the Board of Inland Revenue, and to consider in greater detail what the nature of the seizures has been, and whether the system of rewards which has been in force without change for several years is a good one;and I am inclined to think that it is not. At any rate, before the Estimates for next year are presented I will do my best, in conjunction with the Board of Inland Revenue, to inquire fully into this matter, and I hope that I shall be able to make a satisfactory statement. As I only had my attention drawn to this matter on Friday last, I am not prepared to make a full statement at the present moment, but I admit that the facts require further explanation. I hope the House will be satisfied with this statement, and allow me the necessary time to make inquiries. With regard to the other questions raised, they refer to the cost of the staff in Ireland and Scotland respectively, and I am afraid that it is not possible for me to enter into a detailed explanation of the duties of every officer mentioned, or the reason why more are employed in one place than the other. The staff is selected with a view to the duties that have to be performed, and we take care that we do not have more staff than there is work for, and the extra staff employed in Scotland is due to extra work.
MR. CREAN (Cork, S. E.) protested against the system established in Ireland of creating crime where no crime exists. He knew that this was the case, because he had conversed with some of the constables at the places where bogus seizures
had been made. Those who were making these bogus seizures were not only swindling the Treasury but they were blackening the character of the country, where they were supposed to carry out the law impartially. The truth was that they were not honest and proper seizures at all, for those who concealed things could easily find them. He thought it would be well if the Secretary to the Treasury extended his inquiry so as to find out whether the rewards were genuine or not. He felt sure that many of the rewards were bogus ones, and he did not think they would be justified in voting this sum that night, because it was practically a premium on dishonesty. He thought the Secretary to the Treasury had made his promised inquiry in order to get the Vote through. This money was squandered in order to create crime where crime did not exist before.
Question put and agreed to.
Second resolution:;
*MR. HENNIKER HEATON (Canterbury): I again desire to enter my protest against the absence of the Postmaster General in this House, and against the absence of any direct representative of the Post Office in the House of Commons. No doubt my hon. friend who represents the Post Office in this House has shown great intelligence and courtesy, but we are face to face with this fact, that the hon. Gentleman the Secretary to the Treasury had never been in the Post Office in his life before he took up his present position. Therefore he knows nothing about the Post Office, and upon three occasions last week he had to ask for notice of questions which a direct representative of the Department would have been able to answer at once. The great importance of the Post Office is shown by the fact that the Department employs 175,000 persons, and its revenue exceeds £;17,000,000. There are hundreds of cases of complaints which it is necessary to bring before the attention of the Postmaster General, but under the present system it is impossible to reach him except by means of a long correspondence. As I have told the Committee before, during the past five years
only three questions have been addressed to the Postmaster General in the House of Lords, while some thousands of questions affecting that Department have been asked in the House of Commons. I wonder what would be the position of affairs if we had no representative of the War Office or the Admiralty in this House, and I maintain that it is of equal importance that some direct representative of the Post Office should represent that great Department in this House. There is no Member of the House of Commons who does not realise the importance of having a representative in the House of Commons directly connected with the Post Office. It is perfectly well known that if this question is allowed to be considered entirely apart from party politics a resolution for the direct representation of the Post Office in this House would be carried unanimously. This is the state of affairs which exists under the present system. My hon. friend who at present represents the Treasury possesses undoubted ability, but he is quite unable to answer any ordinary point without referring to the Post Office, and that is a state of things which we ought not to tolerate in this House, considering the enormous importance of the Post Office. I wish to move that the salary of the Postmaster General or the Vote be reduced by a sum of £;100 in order to test this question.
I shall now proceed to point out two or three grievances in regard to the Post Office which will, I think, illustrate the utter inability of the Postmaster General to make reforms even of the smallest description, and I will endeavour to show how necessary it is that the House of Commons should assert its authority in matters of this kind. I have so often brought these questions before the House that I am almost ashamed to repeat them. For every one of the receipts given for a 6d. telegram, which does not cost a farthing, the Post Office charge 2d. It is almost incredible that any Government department would dare to make a charge of this kind. No successful merchant or business man would do so. The late Postmaster General made an appeal to the Treasury to abolish this charge, but that appeal was made in
vain. I think that an annoying and irritating charge of this character should be abolished at once, for it would only cost the Treasury about £;120 a year. My next point is in regard to the question of postal orders. It is not generally known that the profit on lost postal orders amounts to considerably over £;10,000 a year;I think it amounts to £;15,000, but they credit the Post Office with £;10,000 a year.
MR. WEIR: It is £;15,000.
*MR. HENNIKER HEATON: That being the case, you would imagine that a great Department like the Post Office would deal liberally with the public in regard to postal orders. This, however, is not the case, and there is a rule to the effect that any postal order not presented within three months is subject to fines. The result is that in a very short time the fines amount to so much that the postal orders are not worth presenting. A gentleman from a bank in Ireland sent me a postal order for 1s. which had been mislaid since the year 1890. He had presented it in Dublin, but the Post Office officials told him that if they cashed it he would have to pay them 1s. 4d. in fines. In regard to having a greater variety of amounts in the value of postal orders, I know it is a rather complicated subject, but I do complain of the inability of the Postmaster General to issue a sufficient number of varieties of amounts, because this causes great annoyance to the public. The public often pay more for postal orders for 19s. 6d. than for postal orders for £;1. I particularly regret the inability of the Postmaster General to issue a postal order for a guinea. With regard to the extension of postal orders, it is remarkable that, although you can get them at Gibraltar and Hong Kong, the Post Office will not extend postal orders to Australia and other colonies, notwithstanding the fact that frequent petitions have been presented to the Postmaster General upon this subject. My chief complaint is that the charges are considerably in excess of the charges in any other country in the world. If I send 5s. to France I have to pay 6d. for the money order, but a Frenchman can send 5s. to London for 1d. In each
case we send the money orders through the respective post offices of France and England. This ought not to be tolerated. Frequent complaints have been made, and the Postmaster General has announced his inability to deal with the matter. There are scores of cases which show that the British Post Office is absolutely incapable of dealing with these matters, and the annoyance to the people is very great indeed.
There is another important matter in this connection which will appeal to hon. Members of this House. It is a fact that you cannot send a few pence to this country from any country in the world to purchase a periodical or a newspaper without the recipient being subject to a fine. A man wrote to me from Africa the other day stating that he would like to have sent 6d. as a contribution to some charitable object, and he complained that to send that 6d. from his colony to this country would cost him 9d. for the order. There are hundreds of cases daily arising where people want to send to this country for books or catalogues, and it is impossible to send a few pence for this purpose. The remedy for this is a very simple one. There should be one room at the Post Office, and at the principal post offices in this country, where stamps of the Empire and of foreign countries could be exchanged for a small commission. An arrangement of this kind would be a very great convenience to the people. I do not wish to detain the House upon this question, and it would take me till to-morrow morning to describe the whole of the details. I wish, however, to point out that in regard to the great city of London the time has arrived for an alteration of the whole office in various directions. I think the time has arrived when we should have three classes of postmen;the first-class, the second-class, and the third-class. The first-class postmen should be sent out on the first delivery with letters, the second-class postmen with newspapers, and the third-class postmen with parcels. The effect of this arrangement would be that every house within an area of seven miles would have the letters delivered earlier every morning, as they were at present in all the great cities of the kingdom. What do we see now
early in the morning? About half-past eight we often see the postman heavily weighted with a huge bag of newspapers and letters and parcels all mixed up together. The whole thing is absurd. If you have first-class postmen to go out first with the letters, quickly followed by the second-class postmen with the newspapers, and the third-class with the parcels, then you would have an earlier and a more intelligent delivery by the first-class postmen, and I think a reform of this kind would work very well indeed.
I shall not to-night describe in detail the present condition of affairs and the waste of expenditure which goes on in this great Government department. I think it is, however, a great disgrace to this country that we have not at the present time in connection with the Post Office a printing department. In most countries the Government office print all their own stamps and postcards and other things, and I have been informed on good authority that a saving of from £;25,000 to £;30,000 a year could be effected if the Government had a printing office of their own. The arrangements in regard to the delivery of postcards and parcels require looking into, and one of the ablest men in the Post Office has told me that a saving of £;280,000 a year could be effected by a rearrangement of the Post Office administration in London alone. I will not go further into details upon this occasion, and I will content myself by merely entering a protest, because it would be absurd to expect any changes or improvement while the present administration is continued. In order to test the question of the desirability of having a direct representative of the Post Office in this House, I beg to move this reduction. If the Government will not make this a party question I feel sure that the result will be that it will be found that the whole House of Commons is in favour of a change of this kind.
Amendment proposed;
"To leave out '£;5,528,810,' in order to insert '£;5,528,710' instead thereof.";(Mr. Henniker Heaton)
Question proposed, "That '£;5,528,810' stand part of the resolution."
MR. KEIR HARDIE: I have listened with much pleasure to the most interest-
ing exposition of public grievances against the Post Office contained in the speech of the hon. Member for Canterbury. Without respect to party, I think we are all thankful to the hon. Member who has just sat down for his effort in the past in connection with reforms in the postal department. I rose for the purpose of calling attention to another aspect of Post Office administration. The House of Commons must not forget that much of the success of the Post Office is due to the efficiency of the men employed in the various departments, to whose complaints the First Lord of the Treasury has turned a deaf ear. Last week, when this Vote was under discussion, the Leader of the House stated that there was no real grievance existing amongst the Post Office employees, and in the course of the debate it was stated that the outcome of the Tweedmouth Committee, which recently sat to determine into those grievances, had been practically to make the conditions of employment under the Post Office much more favourable to the employees. I will not attempt to-night to enter at any length into the many details of the numerous grievances which Post Office servants complain of. There is, however, one aspect of their demands which is entitled to the serious consideration of the House of Commons. I endorse the suggestion which my hon. friend has made as to the need for a permanent Committee to deal not only with the conditions of employment in the Post Office, but also with other matters affecting the administration of the Post Office. The employees of the Post Office request from the House of Commons the appointment of a special Committee to investigate their grievances, and to formulate such remedies as the circumstances demand. May I point out that the Tweedmouth Committee was a Departmental Committee, and the servants were not represented on it. From a Departmental Committee it is almost impossible to secure a decision of any breadth or width. It is like allowing a jury of malefactors to try their own case, and under such circumstances we can anticipate what the finding will be.
Let me give one illustration of the sort of minor grievances under which Post Office servants are still labouring. Take, for example, the case of the rural postmen.
They were recommended by Lord Tweedmouth's Committee to be paid a scale of wages whereby they were able to advance to 18s. and 20s. a week and higher, but of late the Post Office has been departing, from that recommendation, and instead of appointing rural postmen under the scale it has been appointing them at fixed wages of 16s. a week. That is to say, instead of a man being encouraged to perform his duty adequately, and with the prospect of an early increment in his wages, he has no such outlook, and, instead of the wage being as the Tweedmouth Committee recommended, under the new method of treating the rural postmen the maximum is 16s. a week. A matter of small detail, but still an irritating one, is the way in which those men are paid for Sunday work and Christmas and other holidays. Formerly they were paid so much per hour for the time they were employed, in delivering letters on these particular days, but now they are paid not so much per hour, but so much per mile covered in the delivery. Well, on the face of it, these arrangements are stupid. In one mile there might be fifty or sixty houses, and in another there may be 500 or 600 houses. It is obviously impossible to cover the ground in the same time where the houses are numerous, and it is desirable, looking to the circumstances under which the rural postmen work, that the old system of payment by time instead of by mileage should be resorted to. I understand that a case was submitted to the Financial Secretary to the Treasury some time ago, and that it was proved to him clearly how this new system worked out. I have to ask to-night whether he is in a position to state what the result of his consideration of the case has been, and whether the rural postmen in this respect may anticipate any change.
These are a few illustrations of some of the minor grievances which irritate a body of useful and intelligent employees, and I would desire to point out, with all respect to the House, that, whilst the servants of the Post Office have no desire to inconvenience the community by any cessation or stoppage of work on their part, still if the House and the Government persist in turning a deaf ear to their claim for an impartial
investigation of their grievances these men will not be to blame if in the end their patience and forbearance give way and the whole of our postal system is disorganised by some big labour dispute. I therefore hope that the Government, through the Financial Secretary to the Treasury, will not to-night again take up the non possumus attitude adopted by the First Lord of the Treasury of threatening these Post Office servants with disfranchisement because they are doing what every Member of this House is doing;seeking to protect his own interest in a constitutional fashion. It is an insult to these men, and I should like to see the Government that would attempt to disfranchise the civil servants of the country. This House stands in relation to these civil servants just as the board of directors of a private company do to the men they employ. These men have a right to come to us at election times or other times and state their grievances, and to ask us to assist them in securing redress. To threaten them with disfranchisement for constitutional action of that kind, as was done on Friday evening, was unworthy of the First Lord of the Treasury. These, briefly, are some of the points upon which the postmen feel keenly, and upon which they demand inquiry. I trust that to-night we shall have some encouragement given to these men to go on performing their duty by having the prospect held out to them of getting their legitimate grievances inquired into in the proper way.
MR. BROADHURST (Liecester): At present, as for some years past, we have no means of communication whatever with the Post Office except by a Treasury messenger. I have no cause of complaint with the manner in which the previous and the present Secretary of the Treasury have done their work, but the House of Commons has a right to direct access to the Department, which is one of the most important, affecting as it does the welfare of the poorer classes of the community. There are with regard to the Post Office undoubted grievances. We ought to have a direct, sure, and certain means of communication between this House and the heads of this great Department.
The beginning and almost the end of our difficulty in this matter is that we have no direct representative of the Department in this House. I sincerely hope that the hon. Member will divide on this question, and that the Secretary to the Treasury will make representations to the Government in connection with this matter. I know that the Post Office grievances are great, and one might almost say they are acute. We shall never have satisfaction in this matter until we have the head of the Post Office sitting in this House. I sincerely trust that immediate steps will be taken, so that we shall have the representative element which is desired. It is an absurd idea to have the Postmaster General in the House of Lords. There is no trade, no commerce, no anything represented there, except the brewing interest, which is not a large commercial interest. We are representing the industries of the country in this House, and yet we are only treated with a messenger to take occasional communications from this House to the Post Office, however well that work is done. It is no reflection on those who have been the go-betweens up to now, but it is not respectful to the country, and certainly not respectful to the House of Commons. I sincerely trust that the hon. Member for Canterbury, who has done such marvellous service to the country in postal reform, will press the question to a division.
MR. JOHN DEWAR (Invernessshire) said that two years ago the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Preston, who was Financial Secretary to the Treasury then, promised that there would be an improved delivery of letters all over the country, including the remote parts of Scotland and Ireland. On that occasion an Amendment was withdrawn when the promise was made. The Postmaster General had since then written that a bi-weekly service could not be granted on account of the expense. He thought that no part of the country should have to submit to a weekly or a fortnightly delivery of letters. In certain rural districts they did not ask a daily delivery, but a better service should be provided than at present.
MR. GILHOOLY (Cork County, W.) called attention to the inadequate postal
service provided at Baltimore, an important fishing station in the south of Ireland. Letters from Cork were detained at Skibbereen for a day, although the trains proceeded to Baltimore. He wished to know whether this matter was going to be remedied. He also asked whether the postal service could not be improved at other important fishing stations. It had been proved by Royal Commission that Ireland was cheated of two and a quarter millions a year; and surely when they asked for an expenditure of only £;6 or £;7 a year it ought not to be grudged. He wished to know from the hon. Member whether he was going to remedy this grievance, and what they were going to expect from the Government in the way of killing Home Rule by kindness.
MR. LOUGH: When this Vote was before the Committee the chief discussion occurred on the question whether the hon. Gentleman in charge of Post Office matters would see his way to the appointment of a Committee to inquire into the grievances of the Post Office employees. The hon. Member refused to grant that Committee; but I do not think that it will be possible to continue that refusal if the Postmaster General does not give a more sympathetic consideration to definite cases of abuses or grievances brought before him. I myself have been in correspondence with the Postmaster General for eight months on a particular subject, but have been unable to get any satisfaction from him. It is not my wish to trouble the House with petty details, for I consider that the House is the worst tribunal in the world to deal with these sort of questions. They could much better be dealt with by a Special Commission, or some other authority which could deal gently and kindly with the men and their grievances. But after four hours discussion there was a blank refusal of such a Special Commission or authority. The grievance to which I wish to allude lies in a very small compass. Everyone in the House desires to see the Sunday labour of the Post Office servants restricted as far as possible. In carrying out this very desirable reform a few old servants in the Post Office in London;not more than twenty in all;who have been carrying on Sunday duty for thirty
to thirty-five years, have been deprived of that Sunday duty, and their pay has consequently been reduced from £;15 to £;20 a year. The men get the Sunday rest, and they do not object to the reduction of their pay; but they are entering on the last three years on the pay on which the amount of their pensions will be calculated under the ordinary rule, and the consequence will be that their pensions will be materially reduced. Now, they have asked the Department to consider their case as special. Some of them have worked for thirty-five years, and they ask that their pensions, when due, shall not be calculated on the three years in which the pay has been compulsorily reduced, but on the three years preceding. Does that not seem reasonable? They may have to lose £;13 a year in pensions because the Post Office have made this change. This is a business matter, and it, could be quite easily dealt with; but the Department insists on putting a very harsh interpretation on some red-tape rule, and leaves these men under the rankling feeling that they are being hardly dealt with.
COLONEL NOLAN (Galway, N.) said that the wise policy of the First Lord of the Treasury in instituting light railways to the West Coast had called for a great increase in postal facilities, and especially for a Sunday delivery at the fishing towns. It was true that in some places the postal facilities had been increased, but not sufficiently for the development of the fisheries. He hoped the Financial Secretary to the Treasury would not only take note of the places mentioned by the hon. Member for West Cork, but would take into consideration the necessity of increased postal facilities for the whole coast district generally. There was a point of more general interest to which he wished to direct the attention of the Financial Secretary to the Treasury. There seemed to be a totally different system in regard to the established force of postmen and the unestablished men in England, Scotland, and Ireland. And, as usual, wherever there was a difference of system in the public service between the three countries, Ireland got the worst of it. [HON. MEMBERS: No, no.] Yes; he spoke from experience.
He found that the proportion of established postmen in England to unestablished was as three to one; in Scotland as two to one; and in Ireland the postmen were chiefly unestablished. He knew that the established force always got the best of it in pension and pay. He hoped the Secretary to the Treasury would make inquiry into it and remedy this matter.
*MR. JOHN BURNS (Battersea): One is very reluctant indeed to occupy the time of the House of Commons on petty matters of postal administration in the small hours of the morning. But the fact that we are driven to discuss a vast concern such as the Post Office, employing 170,000 people, and spending an enormous number of millions at such a time, is evidence that the Department is not managed in the best possible way. Although I am disinclined to keep Members out of their beds, I wish to say one or two words before the division. The fact that we have various grievances continually brought up;although there is certainly one with which I do not agree;is to me proof positive that we ought to devise some more reasonable method of disposing of the grievances of the postmen, and a better method of dealing with the complaints of the commercial public against the Post Office. The hon. Member for Canterbury has proved the necessity for the direct representation of the Post Office in this House. I venture to say that some of the grievances which we have heard of, as to the mismanagement of the Post Office, would not be heard of by way of needless questions and speeches if we could get in contact with the representative of the Post Office in this House. I have only asked six questions in ten years, and I hope I take as much interest in some departments of administration as hon. Members who speak for the Post Office officials. I am not specially concerned with the Post Office; but in other Departments I can see the Minister, and by a conversation over the tea table or in the smoke room we can save endless questions and avoid needless waste of time which are caused by the want of a direct representative of the Post Office in the House of Commons. If the First Lord of the
Treasury wants to save the time of the House, let him have the Postmaster General in this House. I venture to say he could save half an hour or an hour almost every day by such a change. The hon. Member for Canterbury comes here year after year and makes up a powerful indictment against the mismanagement of the Post Office, and its flagrant inconsistencies; and the public are with the hon. Member, and against the Post Office. Why is this? It is simply because the Secretary to the Treasury, however energetic, and however willing he may be to discharge the duties of his dual post, cannot get close to the heads of the Department or be intimate with the endless detail of postal work. If the Postmaster General and the hon. Member for Canterbury were locked up in a room for five or six hours, and fought out the matters in dispute, with an impartial umpire looking through the window, nine out of ten questions put in the House would not be required, and much inconvenience to the public would be avoided. There is another matter. I am under the impression that the Secretary to the Treasury is the last-individual in the world to be selected to do the work here of the Post Office. The Treasury ought to be the watchdog of economy and finance; and it should be the duty of the Financial Secretary to the Treasury to look after expenditure so as to secure greater value for the taxpayers' money. Instead of occupying his time in this important duty of economic watchdog, the Secretary to the Treasury is made the departmental drudge of the Postmaster General to the detriment and exclusion of his supervisory Treasury duties.
Now, Sir, I desire to have from the House an expression of opinion on one or two points connected with the Post Office. Our mail carts are a scandal and a disgrace, and the horses are a disgrace to any Government that claims to be humane. I feel very keenly on these points. I do not wish to worry, the Secretary to the Treasury with innumerable questions about dirty mail carts or horses that ought to be in the knacker's yard, or drivers who seem to be clothed from the salvage sales of old clothes dealers in the East End of London. I
do not wish to put questions to the hon. Gentleman on these subjects, but if the Postmaster General were in this House I would point out to him how the County Council horse their Fire Brigade, how they clothe their firemen, and park constables, and by direct argument, and I hope good reasoning, I could show him a more excellent way of managing the mail cart service than he now practises. I could give him many excellent reasons for an improved distribution of letters, books, and newspapers and the practical and profitable extension of the Post Office service. I am convinced that the public as well as the staff are discontented, and the time of the House of Commons will be wasted in the future even more than it now is, because the Secretary to the Treasury may make up his mind that the House of Commons is determined to improve the Post Office. In these days of foreign competition and the necessity for rapid transit, the public are looking to the Post Office as a means of meeting some of that competition by the conveyance of light articles, which the Post Office will not undertake to carry. Therefore I claim that the Postmaster General should be in this House, so as to be in touch with well informed and representative opinion. I also claim that when we have the Postmaster General in this House we shall also have a small Committee appointed from both sides, and without distinction of party, to be joined to the Postmaster General to help him to manage this vast Department. I would make the hon. Gentleman the Member for Canterbury one of that Committee. Five or six Members would be associated with the Postmaster General, and instead of the hon. Member for Canterbury or the hon. Member for Battersea delaying the House of Commons at twenty-five minutes to one in the morning over necessary but unimportant details and grievances they should be closeted with the Postmaster General once a week, or once a fortnight, or once a month, and nineteen out of twenty Post Office questions which now take up public time would be dealt with by that Committee;questions not only affecting the employees, but also matters with reference to the extension of the
Post Office generally would be considered. I know what the bureaucrats will urge. I know what the ossified officials at St. Martin's le Grand will say. They will say that it would kill discipline. It would do no such thing. Discipline is impossible without confidence, and the present system breeds mistrust. I can give a parallel instance. We have in London a fire brigade consisting of 1,200 men. They are admittedly organised on a military basis; that is, that the chief of the fire brigade does what he likes with his men in the technical duties they have to discharge, and the County Council does not interfere with him. He has full discretion, not only in regard to the discipline of his men, but also with regard to their administrative management. An executive committee of the Council is joined to the chief of the fire brigade, and when any of the men have a grievance they have a right to approach that committee, either through their chief or directly, and the fact that last year only three men desired to approach the committee is an indication that discipline can be maintained by that system, which also gives the chief of the fire brigade the assistance of a committee in the technical, practical, and economical administration of the fire service to an extent which would not be possible if he alone were responsible, as the Postmaster General is, for the Post Office. I believe that one of these days such a Committee will be appointed for the Post Office, and the sooner it is appointed the better for the present condition and the future improvement of the Post Office. I shall have to reiterate that view, because I want the House of Commons to believe that it is the only solution of the problem, the only way of obtaining the confidence of the men and giving satisfaction to the general public.
My last point is this. It will be said these Standing Committees will not work. I do not believe it. Take the case of the Navy. Whenever the Navy makes a blunder over Belleville boilers, or anything else, who are the people to put it right? The House of Commons throws over the permanent officials and experts and gets three or four practical engineer Members from its own ranks to show the permanent officials how not to perpetrate similar mistakes in future. When the War Office does not manage its cam-
paign with military precision in South Africa, who are appointed to show them a more excellent way? Why, a Committee of business men from both sides of the House, joined with military men, who show the War Office what should be done. What I want is that the Post Office should be shown how to avoid mistakes, just as are the Navy and the Army. If such a Committee is good enough for the War Office and the Navy in times of difficulty, blunder, and mismanagement, it ought to be good enough for the Post Office to prevent mistakes. Therefore I ask the serious consideration of the House of Commons to the view that I now express, that there should be a small Committee appointed by the House of Commons to assist the permanent officials in each of the great spending departments, which when an unreasonable claim is put forward would resist it, but when a legitimate grievance is brought forward would support it with all the weight of knowledge and deserved sympathy. Pending the appointment of that Committee, the next alternative is that the Government should see the folly of having the Postmaster General in another place, and that he should be brought as soon as possible into the House of Commons. If the Secretary to the Treasury is made Postmaster General, we shall stand up and criticise him with greater frankness and more justification, because he will then have the whole responsibility, and we will not let him off as we do now, nine times out of ten, because we know that Dr. Jekyll is in the House of Lords and Mr. Hyde in the House of Commons. The Secretary to the Treasury is not responsible, and until he is made responsible he can put us off, as he has done to-night, with great courtesy and plausibility, but with little knowledge. We want the man whose hand is on the machine, and to whom we can bring responsibility home, and if the hon. Member who moved the reduction gets to a division I shall support him.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: Several questions have been mentioned to-night, two of them of great scope and importance, the others being questions of detail. The majority of them have been used to illustrate the thesis
which the hon. Member for Canterbury and the hon. Gentleman opposite, who desire to see a House of Commons Committee to inquire into Post Office matters, put before the House, and which was brought forward not so much to get an answer at this time as for the purpose of showing what is the effect of having the Postmaster General in another place. There are two questions of detail which I am bound in courtesy to deal with as shortly as I can. Two hon. Gentlemen from Ireland spoke about the better delivery of letters in places in that country, and in particular in connection with the fishing trade, to develop which considerable efforts have been made. The Government are naturally interested in the question, and hon. Members will find us not unfriendly in regard to what may be necessary in that connection. At the same time, I must say, as I have already said, that we must have regard to the amount of business which there is to be done, and to the amount of revenue obtainable, and the proportion which one bears to the other. We cannot, with the best goodwill in the world, agree to give all the postal facilities which may be required by every individual village or town, without having regard to the cost of that service and the revenue to be derived from it. The hon. Member for West Islington complained that he had been in correspondence with the Postmaster General for eight months without getting satisfaction. I am afraid we could not give the hon. Gentleman satisfaction except by doing everything he wished, and that would not be possible in most cases. The hon. Member referred to certain postmen in London who have to do extra duty on Sundays. The amount the men received in respect of that duty, which is in the nature of overtime pay, becomes part of their pensionable emoluments.
MR. LOUGH: How can it be described as extra duty when it has been going on for thirty years?
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: It is a duty for which the men have volunteered and which they are anxious to retain. They volunteer for it every Sunday in the year, and the Postmaster
General felt it necessary to interfere not only in the interests of the men, but also of the postal service, and to put restrictions on the amount of Sunday labour which any man might do. I think it is not in the interests of the individual or of the service that a man should, week in and week out, work seven days.
MR. LOUGH: Did not the Postmaster General arrive at that decision only last year?
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: If the hon. Gentleman informs me of that, I accept his statement. It is said that these men have been regularly engaged on this work. They volunteered for the work and were prepared to do it Sunday after Sunday, and the Postmaster General accordingly issued an order preventing any man from doing any more than a reasonable amount of work. That had the effect of reducing the immediate emoluments of these men in proportion to the decreased work, and to that extent will reduce their pensions. The hon. Gentleman says that that is a great hardship; but no man has a right to claim overtime without regard to its effect on himself and the service, or to the discretion invested in the Postmaster General. Then the hon. Gentleman says, Why should not these men be pensioned on the basis of another three years? They have not been doing this extra work, and therefore are not entitled to an extra pension, and we should be breaking the law if we did that. I am therefore sorry I cannot promise to do what the hon. Gentleman asks.
I now come to the larger question brought forward by the hon. Member for Canterbury and the hon. Member opposite. The hon. Member for Canterbury is well known for the interest he takes in Post Office questions, and he is honourably associated with Post Office reform. There are many improvements which he still thinks might be effected in the service, and he seems to think that it would be a specific for every grievance if the Postmaster General sat in this House. I am afraid that that would not satisfy my hon. friend or remove all cause of complaint. The fact of the matter is that the Post Office business is very difficult and complex.
It consists to a very large extent of details which require a great deal of attention to master, and I am not by any means certain that from the administrative point of view, as my right hon. friend who is now President of the Board of Agriculture stated on the previous occasion, it is not a positive advantage for the Postmaster General to have the greater freedom and the larger leisure which a Member of the other House has. In any case, I venture to put it to the House that the process of forming a Government and selecting the persons most fitted for each office is already a sufficiently difficult task, and that the House will be making that task infinitely more difficult if it lays it down that this or that particular office must necessarily be held by a Member of this House. I hope the House will not add any such restriction. Then the hon. Member for Battersea said that if the Postmaster General was to be represented in this House the worst person to choose for that purpose was the Financial Secretary. I confess I do not agree with him. [An HON. MEMBER: It is not a personal matter.] Of course, if it had been a personal charge, I would not have made this remark; but I am treating the matter differently, and am not speaking of it as a personal matter at all. The Post Office and the Treasury are necessarily brought into very close contact. It is one of the complaints of the hon. Member for Canterbury and other hon. Gentlemen interested in Post Office reform, or perhaps I might say change in post Office methods of management, that the control of the Treasury is too direct and too far reaching, and that above all, as we were told the other night, it is ignorant and unsympathetic. What better cure could anyone devise for that state of affairs than making the representative of the Treasury responsible for the Post Office in this House? If it be the case that the Treasury has delayed and thwarted Post Office reform;which I do not admit;I say there could be no better remedy or no better means of putting a strong check on the Treasury than by making the representative of the Treasury also the representative of the Post Office, and therefore the scapegoat for its misdeeds. I think it must be obvious to hon. Gentlemen that the
fact that the Financial Secretary has to answer for the Post Office in this House forces upon him an interest in Post Office work, and brings him into contact with the complaints and demands of the public, which under other circumstances he would not be likely to possess. Under our present system the Treasury has to exercise some control over the spending and revenue departments, and it is not altogether a misfortune that the Financial Secretary should have to answer for these matters in the House of Commons. My hon. friend says he objects to Treasury control, but if the Treasury did not occasionally, so to speak, focus different demands and compare the urgency of one with another, if there were not some department to exercise this control over the spending departments, I think that the complaints of hon. Gentlemen as to the increase of taxation would be even louder than their present complaints of the Treasury.
The other large question was that raised by the hon. Member for Merthyr Tydvil. He desired to see a Committee of this House appointed to examine into alleged Post Office grievances. The hon. Member said that it was true that a Committee had sat on the matter, but he called it a Departmental Committee, and he said it was similar to a jury of malefactors trying their own case. Just let me remind the House that the Chairman of that Committee was Lord Tweedmouth. There was nothing peculiarly official about him;I say it, of course, with all respect. Another Member was Mr. Llewellyn Smith, Labour Commissioner of the Board of Trade, and there were three other officials. I do not think it would be possible to select a stronger or more impartial Committee, or a Committee more competent to carry out the very far-reaching investigation entrusted to It. The hon. Gentleman talked as if this Committee were mainly composed of officials, and that, therefore, it had some peculiar interest in keeping down expenditure, and so on. But a civil servant at the head of a great department has no personal interest, such as a manufacturer would have, in cutting down wages. His inclination rather would be to give way for the sake of peace and quietness. What I wish to call the attention of the
House to is that no grievance has been brought before the House either to-night or on Friday night which was not carefully examined by the Tweedmouth Committee, and which was not remedied if that Committee recommended that it should be remedied. All the recommendations of that Committee have been carried into effect.
*MR. KEIR HARDIE said that the point of his statement was that rural postmen were not being appointed in accordance with the recommendations of the Tweedmouth Committee and were only being paid 16s. per week.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: I think the hon. Member does not understand the recommendations of the Tweedmouth Committee. If he will give me a specific instance I think I will be able to show him the bearing of the Report of the Committee on the matter. I say no fresh grievance has been brought under our notice. It is therefore not a new case which a Commission, if appointed, would have to try. It would be the old issue, which has been already decided. We are now asked to constitute a new court of inquiry and if the House consents to that there will be no end, as long as a single request is not granted, to these demands. There will still be complaints as to the character of the tribunal, still requests for further inquiries, and there will still be the same kind of pressure placed on Members of the House of Commons. I beg the House to remember after all what is the position of the Post Office employee. He is in many respects a very favourable specimen of the working man, and what he gets he gets at the expense of the whole body of the taxpayers, including the working men, many of them less favourably situated. He gets good wages for the work he has to do, he gets a stripe allowance which amounts to 6s. after twenty-five or thirty years service, he has a right to a pension at the age of sixty or if incapacitated in work earlier, and he has holidays and sick leave on full pay extending to a maximum of six months. Is it to be wondered at that with these terms of employment offered there is no difficulty whatever in filling any of these places? On the contrary, there is great demand for them. Every
hon. Member knows from his own experience how many applicants there are who desire to enter the Post Office service. I do not think postmen would be so ill-advised as ever to act upon the threat held out by the hon. Member for Merthyr Tydvil to the effect that if the House of Commons could not see eye to eye with the men and did not obey their behests they would cause a stoppage of the whole postal system of the country. If they ever did that, I think they would find that there was a public opinion roused against them stronger than anything of which they have any conception. It is only if they are moderate and reasonable that they can expect to have public opinion on their side. If they were to adopt measures of that kind, regardless of the cost or inconvenience they would inflict upon their countrymen, I think it is not the business of the country or the general public, but the ill-advised men themselves who would be the greatest sufferers.
In conclusion, I have only two words to say, and they apply both to Members of this House and to postal servants. A great deal has been said about the inaccessibility of the Postmaster General. One hon. Member after the discussion on Friday came to me and said, "Why do you not do as we do in the business firm with which I am connected? If any man has a grievance, all he has to do is to go to the general manager and put it before him. Why can you not do that in the G. P. O.?" I said, "That is exactly what the postal employees can do." The Postmaster General has expressed his readiness to receive representatives drawn from any class of men to state their case in regard to the work in which they are employed and the conditions of their service. In the same way I venture to say to hon. Members of this House that they will always find the Postmaster General most ready to meet them and to hear any point they may wish to put before him if they prefer a personal interview. I have only to add that the Postmaster General himself would do his utmost if, instead of asking questions in this House, hon. Members wrote to him, to see that they got their answers at the earliest possible moment. We have now discussed this Vote at considerable length, both on Friday last and
again to-night, and I hope the House will consent to an early division.
MR. WILLIAM REDMOND (Clare, E.): The hon. Gentleman has made an, appeal to the House to come to an early division upon this Vote. He said that on Friday last these matters were discussed at some length, and that they had been again, discussed at some length to-night. That is quite true, but I rise for the purpose of emphasising the complaint of the hon. Member for Battersea of the action of the Government in insisting that important matters in connection with a great public spending Department should be brought on at this hour of the night. I am very reluctant, to prolong this debate unduly, but I do say that when, we have 670 Members of this House, each of whom represents a district largely interested, as it must be, in the whole administration of the Post Office Department, it is rather a large order to ask us to dismiss the entire subject in the course of a few hours on Friday, and a few hours at this time in the morning. The practice of bringing matters of this kind before the attention of Parliament at this hour is a bad one, and if it is necessary to have these late sittings I say that the late sittings should be devoted to the discussion of matters other than the great spending departments of the country, such as the Post Office. Upon this point I will only say that the time given us for the discussion is quite inadequate. Unfortunately, I was not able to be here on Friday last. If I had been present I should have taken the opportunity of bringing forward a great many matters connected with the administration of the Post Office in Ireland However, I had not that opportunity, and certainly at this hour of the night I should not receive either the attention of the Financial Secretary or the consideration of the House if I attempted, to go into details in regard to those matters. It is not fair on the part of the Government to put Members into the position, if they want to discuss what they consider to be faults, drawbacks, and flaws in Post Office administration, of having to sit up the whole night in order to do so. The hon. Member for one of the divisions of Cork put a question to the Financial Secretary with regard to the locality which he represents,
but the hon. Gentleman did not condescend to give any reply or explanation on the point brought forward. There are many Irish Members on these benches who could, if they had the time, bring forward what they rightly consider to be shortcomings in reference to this Department. But if they rose to do so now they would be greeted with cries of "Divide," and they would receive no better treatment than was accorded to the hon. Member for West Cork. We cannot discuss these matters in the form of question and answer, and if we attempt to do so we are at once told that the Irish Members are asking too many questions. I say you should give us a few hours at a reasonable time. We shall have no further opportunity whatever of asking, in the form of a speech, a single question with regard to the administration of the Post Office. I deliberately characterise t as a perfectly monstrous piece of mismanagement on the part of the Government that the House of Commons should be asked at nearly half-past one in the morning to pass, with practically no discussion, this enormous sum, which covers, one might almost say, the whole cost of the Post Office administration of the country. If there are complaints outside in the ranks of postal officials the reason is largely to be found in the fact that those who are acquainted with the grievances, and would like to state them to the House, are not given a proper opportunity for doing so. The Financial Secretary to the Treasury spoke of the Post Office officials as if they were a body of men anxious to bully the House of Commons, to dictate to the Government, and to insist upon every single thing which they demanded being at once granted. He seemed to imply that if those demands were not granted the men would take measures of the most extreme description, and measures calculated to upset the convenience of the whole country. I do not think the hon. Gentleman is justified for one moment in speaking of the Post Office officials in that way.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: Perhaps the hon. Gentleman will allow me to say that what I said was the exact opposite of that.
MR. WILLIAM REDMOND: I beg your pardon.
MR. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN: I said I did not believe the Post Office officials would take that course. I referred to the suggestions made in the speech of the hon. Member for Merthyr Tydvil, and I said that I did not believe the Post Office officials would do that.
MR. KEIR HARDIE: I made no suggestion of the sort. What I said was that if the House of Commons did not pay attention to the claims of these men their patience might give way.
MR. WILLIAM REDMOND: I do not at all attribute to the Financial Secretary any statement to the effect that the Post Office officials contemplated a general strike, but I beg respectfully to be allowed to adhere to my description of the references made by him to those officials as references which seemed to imply that the men were a sort of dictators, that they desired to bully Parliament, and that unless what they demanded was granted at once they would take extreme steps. My view is;and every fair minded man must admit it;that the exact opposite is the case. Post Office officials consider that in certain respects they have not been properly treated. After all, there is no body of public servants in any branch of State administration the members of which do not from time to time seek to better their position or to have remedied grievances from which they consider they are made to suffer illegitimately and unnecessarily. Why, therefore, should not the Post Office officials be allowed to do so in a reasonable way if they consider it necessary and proper? The hon. Gentleman says they are paid good wages. I do not deny it. I do not deny that they have some advantages in the public service, but the hon. Gentleman must admit that that is no reason whatever why they should be deprived of the right of putting forward in a legitimate way the grievances and drawbacks from which they consider they are unnecessarily suffering. As far as I know the Post Office officials in Ireland, that is all they have ever done and they have done it at all times in a reasonable and moderate way.
The hon. Gentleman the Financial Secretary says that the case of the employees was tried by the Tweedmouth Committee not long ago, and cannot now be reopened. I say that their case was not tried fairly. I do not question the strict impartiality of the Tweedmouth Committee, but from the description given by the Secretary to the Treasury I do say that it was not a Committee capable of fairly considering the claims of the men on account of the manner in which it was constituted. The hon. Gentleman said that there was only one Post Office official on the Committee, and that was quite true. The rest of the Committee, however, were Government officials, and everybody knows perfectly well that when a Committee composed exclusively of Government officials sits down at a table to consider the grievances put forward by the rank and file of any branch of the public service there is sure to be, consciously or unconsciously, an official bias against the employees. The tendency of those officials will be to uphold the views of the heads of the Department, and they would rather incline against the views of those who were putting forward the grievances of the employees. That is what took place before the Tweedmouth Committee which did not have a member upon it who could be described as directly or indirectly representing the men. That is what the Post Office employees complain of, and I think it is a most reasonable request that the whole matter of their grievances should be submitted to a Commission in which they will have the most implicit confidence by reason of the fact that they will have upon that Commission one or two gentlemen who will represent their views. That is the kind of Commission asked for, and undoubtedly the Tweedmouth Committee was not one of that kind. I think this demand is perfectly justified by the circumstances.
I wish to make one reference to the Postmaster General. I am not going to say whether it would be to the benefit of the public service that the Postmaster General ought to be in the House of Commons, or in what has been described as "another place." I do say, however, that it is a remarkable thing that, as far as my memory carries me back, I believe I am right in saying that a great majority
of the Postmasters General have always been in the House of Commons. I can say without fear of contradiction that the very best Postmasters General we ever had, including the late Mr. Fawcett, did sit in the House of Commons, and they were in a position to answer the questions put forward by hon. Members in regard to the Post Office Department. Those are facts which the hon. Gentleman opposite may set off against the advantages he has put forth in regard to the Postmaster having a seat in another place, wherever that may be. If it is necessary to have a peer as Postmaster General, there is one thing which I think it is his bounden duty to do as the representative of a great Department, and that is that upon occasions like this, when the Vote for his Department is being discussed, and when the views of all sections and parties are being put forward, the very least he can do is to come and take his seat in the gallery here and listen to what is said in the way of complaint. If he was not in a position to rise in this House and answer straight off the questions put to him, as they are now put to the Secretary of the Treasury, then, at least, on hearing the debate his Lordship;[Ministerial laughter];hon. Gentlemen opposite are evidently not too sleepy to be able to laugh, and I do not know exactly what class of constituencies they represent. I do not suppose that they represent any great section of the democracy, but if they do, and if they will go to their constituency and put the views I am expressing before them, they will find that a great number of their constituents will agree with what I have said.
After all, a Peer who is at the head of one of the greatest Government Departments in this country, and who is paid by the taxpayers of this country the sum of £;5,000 a year.;[An HON. MEMBER: No, no&#x0021; His salary is £;2,500.] I should have thought that any Peer would have turned up his nose as such a small salary as that. At any rate, a member of "another place," who is the head of one of the greatest Departments in this country, and who is not above taking pay from the people of this country for looking after that Department, might at least, for the time being, have the humbleness to come, once in a way,
down to this House, and listen to the complaints of the representatives of the people whose money he is taking and putting into his own pocket. [Ministerial cries of "Divide, divide&#x0021;"] Hon. Members opposite always cry "Divide" when they hear anything particularly true. When we have a discussion such as this, and such as that which took place last Friday on the Post Office Vote; when we have the Member for Canterbury getting up in this House and urging those reforms which everybody must thank him for urging;even then the Postmaster General will not come to the gallery and listen to the debate. But if the hon. Gentleman the Chief Secretary for Ireland got up to make a speech about Irish landlordism, they would always see the Postmaster General there, more especially if there was anything being dealt with in connection with the Irish land question, and if the hon. Member for South Tyrone was about. Sometimes I forget that he is a member of the House of Lords, and I refrain from looking upon him with the proper amount of respect with which I always ought to look upon a member of the House of Lords. At any rate, I put it forward with all the earnestness I can that, while I do not wish to disparage the hon. Gentleman the Secretary to the Treasury, who is most anxious to do the best he can in the position in which he finds himself, I say we have a right to demand that the head of this great Department should at least attend in the House of Commons, and listen to what we have got to say.
It is always a bad thing to turn out the heads of any great Department at the same time. We have got a Secretary to the Treasury who is new to the Post Office. I have no doubt that he will acquit himself creditably when he has been there some time, but he is new to the work. The two principal heads responsible for the working of this great Department are practically new to the work, and I would like to know why the Government did not leave the present President of the Board of Agriculture in the Post Office Department? Why did they not leave him there, or, better still, why did they not make him Postmaster General, when everybody knew that he knew far more about it than any
other member of the Government, because he had administered that Department for five years in this House as Secretary to the Treasury? We have got a brand new Secretary to the Treasury, and we have got an Irish landlord for Postmaster General, who sits in the House of Lords. The Post Office Department is not administered as it should be, and if the time of this House is taken up upon questions in reference to the Post Office hon. Members who ask questions should not be blamed, but the Government ought to be blamed, because they do not give to hon. Members a proper opportunity of discussing this great question at a reasonable time.
MR. O'MARA said he joined in the protest made by his hon. and learned friend against the scant attention which had been paid to the grievances which had been brought forward. [Ministerial cries of "Divide, divide&#x0021;"] He desired to call attention to the fact that Irish officials in the Post Office were very much underpaid as compared with the same class of officials in Scotland. [Ministerial interruptions and Nationalist cries of "Police, police&#x0021;"]
*MR. SPEAKER: Order, order&#x0021;
MR. O'MARA: The population and the postal business of Ireland were nearly the same as in Scotland, and some explanation was required as to why half as much again was paid to postal officials in Scotland as was paid in Ireland. In Ireland there were 3,000 postmasters and sub-postmasters, and altogether they were paid a less total sum than 2,300 postmasters and sub-masters employed in Scotland. That was a point which required some explanation. Ireland was treated unfairly in regard to salaries and promotions.
MR. A. J. BALFOUR rose in his place and claimed to move, "That the Question be now put."
Question put, "That the Question be now put."
The House divided:;Ayes, 139; Noes, 77. (Division List No. 239.)
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Fisher, William Hayes
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
FitzGerald, Sir R. Penrose-
Morrison, James Archibald
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward A.
Mount, William Arthur
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Forster, Henry William
Murray, Rt. Hn. A. G. (Bute)
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Garfit, William
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry).
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Gordon, Hn. J. E. (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Goschen, Hon. George J.
Nicholson, William Graham
Arrol, Sir William
Graham, Henry Robert
Nichol, Donald Ninian
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Green, W. D. (Wednesbury)
Parkes, Ebenezer
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Balfour, Rt. Hn. A. J. (Manch'r)
Greene, Hy. D. (Shrewsbury)
Pretyman, Ernest George
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Purvis, Robert
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W (Leeds
Groves, James Grimble
Pym, C. Gay
Balfour, Maj. K R (Christchurch
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Randles, John S.
Banbury, Frederick George
Hain, Edward
Rankin, Sir James
Beach, Rt Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G. (Midd.
Reid, James (Greenock)
Bond, Edward
Hamilton, Marq. of (L'donderry
Rentoul, James Alexander
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robt. W.
Ridley, Hon M. W. (Staleybr'ge
Brassey, Albert
Hardy, L. (Kent, Ashford)
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Carlile, William Walter
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Robertson, Herb. (Hackney)
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Higginbottom, S. W.
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hope, J. F. (Sh'ffield, Brightside
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Jessel, Capt. Herbert Merton)
Seeley, Chas. Hilton (Lincoln).
Cavendish, V C W (Derbyshire)
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop.
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Keswick, William
Smith, Jas. Parker (Lanarks).
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm)
Lawrence, J. (Monmouth)
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand).
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Lawson, John Grant
Spear, John Ward
Channing, Francis Allston
Lee, A. H. (Hants., Fareham)
Stanley, Edw. Jas. (Somerset)
Chapman, Edward
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Charrington, Spencer
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Stroyan, John
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Long, Rt. Hn. W. (Bristol, S.)
Valentia, Viscount
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Walker, Col. William Hall
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Lowe, Francis William
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Cranborne, Viscount
Lucas, Col. F. (Lowestoft)
Williams, Col. R. (Dorset)
Crossley, Savile
Lucas, R. J. (Portsmouth)
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Macdona, John Cumming
Wilson, A. Stanley (York, E. R.)
Dalkeith, Earl of
M'Arthur, Chas. (Liverpool)
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
M'Calmont, Col. H. L. B. (Cams.
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Davies, Sir H. D. (Chatham)
Majendie, James A. H.
Wodehouse, Rt Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Malcom, Ian
Wortley, Rt Hn. C. B. Stuart
Doughty, George
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfries.)
Wyndham, Rt. Hn. George
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn E.
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow
Finch, George H.
Morgan, Hon. F. (Monm'thsh.)
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Morrell, George Herbert
NOES.
Abraham Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Hammond, John
Murphy, John
Ambrose, Robert
Hardie, J. K. (Merthyr Tydvil)
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Hayden, John Patrick
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N
Boland, John
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Chas. Seale-
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, S.)
Caldwell, James
Hope, John D. (Fife, West)
Norman, Henry
Campbell, John (Armagh S.)
Horniman, Frederick John
O'Brien, K. (Tipperary, Mid)
Causton, Richard Knight
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Cawley, Frederick
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Connor, Jas. (Wicklow, W.)
Cogan, Denis J.
Layland-Barratt, Francis
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Crean, Eugene
Leamy, Edmund
O'Kelly, Jas. (Roscommon, N.)
Cullinan, J.
Levy, Maurice
O'Malley, William
Delany, William
Lough, Thomas
O'Mara, James
Dewar, J. A. (Inverness-sh.)
Lundon, W.
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Dillon, John
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Partington, Oswald
Doogan, P. C.
M'Arthur, Wm. (Cornwall)
Pearson, Sir Weetman D.
Duffy, William J.
M'Crae, George
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
Emmott, Alfred
M'Dermott, Patrick
Power, Patrick Joseph
Flavin, Michael Joseph
M'Govern, T.
Price, Robert John
Flynn, James Christopher
Mooney, John J.
Priestley, Arthur
Gilhooly, James
Morton, E. J. C. (Devonport)
Reddy, M.
Gladstone, Rt. Hon. Herbert J.
Moss, Samuel
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Murnaghan, George
Redmond, William (Clare)
Robson, William Snowdon
Sullivan, Donal
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick B.)
Thomas, J A (Glamorgan, Gow'r
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Weir, James Galloway
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Captain Donelan and Mr. Patrick O'Brien.
Spencer, Rt Hn C R. (Northants)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Stevenson, Francis S.
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Question put accordingly, "That '£;5,528,810' stand part of the resolution."
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt Sir A. F.
Fisher, William Hayes
Morrison, James Archibald
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Mount, William Arthur
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Murray, Rt. Hn. A. G. (Bute)
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Forster, Henry William
Murray, Chas. J. (Coventry)
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Garfit, William
Newdigate, Francis Alex.
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Gordon, Hn. J. E (Elgin &amp; Nairn)
Nicholson, William Graham
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Arrol, Sir William
Graham, Henry Robert
Parkes, Ebenezer
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Green, Walford D (Wednesbury)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Bain, Col. James Robert
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry. S Edm'nds
Pretyman, Ernest George
Balfour, Rt. Hn. A. J. (Manch'r
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Purvis, Robert
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Pym, C. Guy
Balfour, Rt. Hn. G. W. (Leeds
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Randles, John S.
Balfour, Maj K R (Christchurch
Hain, Edward
Rankin, Sir James
Banbury, Frederick George
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G (Midd'x
Reid, James (Greenock)
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Hamilton, Marq. of (L'donderry
Rentoul, James Alexander
Bond, Edward
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge)
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashfo'd
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Brassey, Albert
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Brodrick, Rt. Hn. St. John
Higginbottom, S. W.
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney
Carlile, William Walter
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Carson, Rt. Hn. Sir Edw. H.
Jessel, Captain Herbert Merton
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Cautley, Henry Strother
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop.)
Seely, Chas. Hilton (Lincoln)
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Keswick, William
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire)
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth)
Smith, Jas. Parker (Lanarks)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Lawson, John Grant
Smith, Hn. W. F. D. (Strand)
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm)
Lee, Arthur H (Hants., Fareham
Spear, John Ward
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Wor'c
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Stanley, Edw. Jas. (Somerset)
Chapman, Edward
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Charrington, Spencer
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Stroyan, John
Cochrane, Hn. Thos. H. A. E.
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Collings, Rt. Hn. Jesse
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Valentia, Viscount
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Lowe, Francis William
Walker, Col. William Hall
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Cranborne, Viscount
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Williams, Col. R. (Dorset)
Crossley, Sir Savile
Macdona, John Cumming
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Wilson, A. Stanley (Yorks, E. R.
Dalkeith, Earl of
M'Calmont, Col. H. L. B. (Cambs.
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Majendie, James A. H.
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Davies, Sir Horatio D. (Chatham
Malcolm, Ian
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire)
Wortley, Rt. Hn. C. B. Stuart-
Doughty, George
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. George
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Morgan, David J. (Walthamst'w
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edw.
Morgan, Hn. Fred. (Monm'thsh.
Finch, George H.
Morrell, George Herbert
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.)
Crean, Eugene
Flynn, James Christopher
Ambrose, Robert
Cullinan, J.
Gilhooly, James
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Delany, William
Gladstone, Rt. Hn Herbert John
Boland, John
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Caldwell, James
Dillon, John
Groves, James Grimble
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Donelan, Captain A.
Hammond, John
Causton, Richard Knight
Doogan, P. C.
Hardie, J. Keir (Merthyr Tydvil)
Cawley, Frederick
Duffy, William J.
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Channing, Francis Allston
Emmott, Alfred
Hayden, John Patrick
Cogan, Denis J.
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
The House divided:;Ayes, 136; Noes, 81. (Division List No. 240.)
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Priestley, Arthur
Horniman, Frederick John
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.)
Reddy, M.
Jones, William (Carnarvonshire
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Kennedy, Patrick James
Norman, Henry
Redmond, William (Clare)
Layland-Barratt, Francis
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Mid
Robson, William Snowdon
Leamy, Edmund
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick, B.)
Levy, Maurice
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Lundon, W.
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.)
Spencer, Rt Hn C. R. (Northants
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Stevenson, Francis S.
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Sullivan, Donal
M'Crae, George
O'Malley, William
Thomas, J A (Glamorgan, Gow'r
M'Dermott, Patrick
O'Mara, James
Weir, James Galloway
M'Govern, T.
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Mooney, John J.
Partington, Oswald
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Pearson, Sir Weetman D.
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth).
Moss, Samuel
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Mr. Henniker Heaton and Mr. Lough.
Murnaghan, George
Power, Patrick Joseph
Murphy, John
Price, Robert John
MR. A. J. BALFOUR claimed, "That the main Question be now put."
Main Question put accordingly, "That
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex F.
Fisher, William Hayes
Morrell, George Herbert
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward A.
Morrison, James Archibald
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Forster, Henry William
Mount, William Arthur
Archdale, Edward Mervyn
Garfit, William
Murray, Rt Hn A Graham (Bute
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Gordon, Hn. J. E (Elgin &amp; Nairn
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry
Arnold-Forster, Hugh O.
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Newdigate, Francis Alex.
Arrol, Sir William
Graham, Henry Robert
Nicholson, William Graham
Atkinson, Rt. Hn. John
Green, W. D. (Wednesbury)
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Bain, Col. James Robert
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Parkes, Ebenezer
Balfour, Rt. Hn. A. J. (Manch'r
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Pretyman, Ernest George
Balfour, Rt. Hn. G. W. (Leeds
Groves, James Grimble
Purvis, Robert
Balfour, Maj. K. R. (Christchch
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Pym, C. Guy
Banbury, Frederick George
Hain, Edward
Randles, John S.
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Hamilton, Rt Hn Lord G (Mid'x)
Rankin, Sir James
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Hamilton, Marq of (L'donderry
Reid, James (Greenock)
Bond, Edward
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robt. Wm.
Rentoul, James Alexander
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashfd.
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Brassey, Albert
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Ritchie, Hn. Chas. Thomson
Carlile, William Walter
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Carson, Rt. Hn. Sir Edw. H.
Higginbottom, S. W.
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hope, J. F (Sheffield, Brightside
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Cavendish, R. F. (N. Lancs.)
Jessel, Captain Herbert Merton
Seely, Chas. Hilton (Lincoln
Cavendish V. C. W. (Derbyshire
Kenon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop)
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Keswick, William
Smith, Jas. Parker (Lanarks.)
Chamberlain, Rt. Hn. J. (Birm.
Lawrence, Joseph (Monmouth)
Smith, Hn. W. F. D. (Strand).
Chamberlain, J Austen (Worc'r
Lawson, John Grant
Spear, John Ward
Chapman, Edward
Lee, Arthur H (Hanfs., Fareh'm
Stanley, Edw. Jas. (Somerset
Charrington, Spencer
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Stanley, Lord (Lancs.)
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Stroyan, John
Collings, Rt. Hn. Jesse
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Long, Rt Hn Walter (Bristol, S.)
Valentia, Viscount
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Walker, Col. William Hall
Cranborne, Viscount
Lowe, Francis William
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Crossley, Sir Saville
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Williams, Col. R. (Dorset)
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
Lucas, Reginald J (Portsmouth
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Dalkeith, Earl of
Macdona, John Cumming
Wilson, A. Stanley (York, E. R.
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Davies, Sir Horatio D (Chatham
M'Calmont, Col. H. L. B (Cambs
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Majendie, James A. H.
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E R. (Bath
Doughty, George
Malcolm, Jan
Wortley, Rt. Hn. C. B. Stuart-
Douglas, Rt. Hn. A. Akers-
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Wyndham, Rt. Hn. George
Durning-Lawrence, Sir Edwin
Molesworth, Sir Lewis.
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir William Walrond and Mr. Anstruther.
Finch, George H.
Morgan, David J (Walthamstw
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Morgan, Hn Fred. (Monm'thsh.
this House doth agree with the Committee in the said resolution."
The House divided:;Ayes, 140; Noes, 70. (Division List No. 241.)
NOES.
Abraham, Win. (Cork, N. E.)
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Mara, James
Ambrose, Robert
Layland-Barratt, Francis
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Boland, John
Leamy, Edmund
Partington, Oswald
Caldwell, James
Levy, Maurice
Pearson, Sir Weetman D.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Lough, Thomas
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
Cawley, Frederick
Lundon, W.
Power, Patrick Joseph
Channing, Francis Allston
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Price, Robert John
Cogan, Denis J.
M'Crae, George
Priestley, Arthur
Crean, Eugene
M'Dermott, Patrick
Reddy, M.
Cullinan, J.
M'Govern, T.
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Delany, William
Mooney, John J.
Redmond, Wm. (Clare)
Dewar, John A. (Inverness-sh.)
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Robson, Wm. Snowdon
Dillon, John
Moss, Samuel
Shaw, Thomas (Hawick, B.)
Doogan, P. C.
Murnaghan, George
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Duffy, William J.
Murphy, John
Sullivan, Donal
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Thomas, J A (Glamorgan, Gow'r
Flynn, James Christopher
Nolan, Col. John P (Galway, N.)
Weir, James Galloway
Gilhooly, James
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Norman, Henry
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Hammond, John
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Md
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Hardie, J Keir (Merthyr Tydvil
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;Captain Donelan and Mr. Patrick O'Brien.
Hope, John Deans (Fife, West)
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Horniman, Frederick John
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh'e
O'Malley, William
Further consideration of third resolution deferred till Thursday.
Motion made, and Question, "That this House do now adjourn.";(Sir William Walrond.)
Put, and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at Two of the clock.
APPENDIX I
PUBLIC BILLS
DEALT WITH IN VOLUME XCIV.
Those marked thus * are Government Bills. The figures in parentheses in the last column relate to the page in this volume. "[H. L.]" following the title indicates that the Bill originated in the Lords.
(A.) HOUSE OF LORDS.
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
Alkali, &amp;c. Works Regulation [H.L.]
Lord Kenyon
Report, 17 May (421); Read 3a 20 May (572)
Bishopric of Southwark [H.L.]
Archbishop of Canterbury
Read 2a 20 May (555)
Convocations of the Clergy [H.L.]
Archbishop of Canterbury
Read 1a 17 May (400)
Day Industrial Schools (Ireland) [H.L.]
Earl Meath
Read 1a10 June (1446)
Habitual Drunkards [H.L.]
Bishop of Winchester
Committee, Report, 17 May (401)
Licensing Boards [H.L.]
Earl of Camperdown
Second Reading (negatived) 14 May (11)
Licensing Sessions [H.L.]
Bishop of Winchester
Committee, 17 May (415)
Marriages Legalisation [H.L.]
Lord Belper
Report 17 May (421): Read 3a 20 May (572)
Military Instruction (Schools and Cadets) [H.L.]
Viscount de Montmorency
*Prevention of Corruption (No. 2) [H.L.]
Lord Halsbury
Read 1a 21 May (739); Read 2a 10 June (1445)
*Prisons (Scotland) [H.L.]
Lord Balfour
Report 17 May (421); Read 3a 21 May (726)
Private Legislation Procedure (Ireland) [H.L.]
Earl, of Mayo
Read 1a 17 May (400)
Solicitors [H.L.]
Lord Alverstone
Committee 14 May (33); Report 21 May (725); Read 3a 10 June (1446)
*Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) [H.L.]
Lord Halsbury
Read 1a 21 May (725)
(B.) HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
*Berwickshire County Town [H.L.]
;
Read 2o 10 June (1547)
Burgh Police and Public Health (Scotland)
Mr. Asher
Read 1o 17 May (462)
*Burgh Sewerage, Drainage and Water Supply (Scotland)
Mr. A. Graham Murray
Read 1o 24 May (1133)
*Civil List
Mr. J. W. Lowther
Read 2o 24 May (1134); Committee 10 June (1490)
Companies (Certificate)
Mr. Gordon
Read 1o 14 May (65)
Coroners' Inquests (Railway Fatalities)
Mr. Channing
Withdrawn 6 June (1306)
County Councils (Legislation)
Mr. Bigwood
Read 1o 17 May (462)
*Demise of the Crown
Sir Robert Finlay
Committee, Report 24 May (1135)
Read 3o 10 June (1537)
Education (Continuation Schools)
Sir J. Brunner
Read 1o 21 May (785)
Education of the Blind (Scotland)
Sir J. Stirling-Maxwell
Read 1o 21 May (786)
*Finance
Mr. J. W. Lowther
Second Rdg., 20 May (614); 21 May (786); 23 May (1051)
*Fisheries (Ireland)
Mr. Wyndham
Read 2o 16 May (396)
Inebriates Acts Amendment
Dr. Farquharson
Read 1o 24 May (1133)
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment
Mr. J. P. Farrell
Second Rdg. (Bill rejected) May 22 (884)
*Larceny
Sir Robert Finlay
Read 2o 10 June (1541)
Legal Procedure (Ireland)
Mr. T. M. Healy
Second Reading (put off for six months) 15 May (175)
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies)
Mr. Wingfield-Digby
Read 2o 15 May (231); Committee 6 June (1305)
*Prisons (Scotland)
;
Read 1o 6 June (1220)
Public Libraries [H.L.]
;
Read 1o 23 May (989)
*Purchase of Land (Ireland)
Mr. Wyndham
Read 1o 20 May (612); Read 2o 10 June (1553.)
Sewage and Drainage (Local Authorities)
Sir W. Foster
Read 1o 14 May (65)
APPENDIX II.
HOUSE OF COMMONS. SESSION 1901.
LIST OF RULES, ORDERS, &amp;c. which have been presented during the Session, and are required by Statute to lie for an appointed number of Days upon the Table of the House.
[Continuation of List given in preceding Volume.]
Title of Paper.
Date from which the Period runs.
Period to lie upon the Table.
Merchant Shipping (Mercantile Marine Fund) Act, 1898,;Copy of Draft Order in Council altering the Scale of Rules and Exemptions set out in the Second Schedule to the Act, for the purpose of the levying of Light Dues with respect to voyages made by Home Trade Sailing Ships and Steamers, and for Yachts which are laid up during the whole of any year ending 31st March [61 and 62 Vic, c. 41, s. 5(3)]
20 May
30 sitting days
Prisons (Rules for Convict Prisons),;Copy of Draft of Rules for Convict Prisons proposed to be made under The Prison Act, 1898, with regard to the Dietary of Convicts [61 and 62 Vic, c. 41, s. 2 (2)]
21 May
30 days
Prisons (Rules for Local Prisons),;Copy of Draft of Rules for Local Prisons proposed to be made under the Prison Act, 1898, with regard to the Dietary of Prisoners [61 and 62 Vic, c. 41, s. 2 (2)]
21 May
30 days
Irish Land Commission (Rules),;Copy of Rules made by the Irish Land Commission under the Land Purchase Acts, dated the 17th May 1901 [44 and 45 Vic. c. 49, s. 50 (3)]
6 June
100 sitting days
Endowed Schools Act, 1869, and Amending Acts,;Copy of Scheme for the Management of the Grammar School of King Edward VI. and other Endowments in the borough of Stratford-on-Avon, in the county of Warwick [36 and 37 Vic. c. 87, s. 15]
6 June
Two months
Union of Benefices Act (Saint Mary at Hill with Saint Andrew Hubbard, and Saint George, Botolph Lane, with Saint Botolph, Billingsgate),;Copy of Scheme for effecting an union of the Benefices of St. Mary at Hill with Saint Andrew Hubbard, and Saint George, Botolph Lane, with Saint Botolph, Billingsgate [23 and 24 Vic, c. 142, s. 15]
6 June
Two months
Intermediate Education (Ireland),;Copy of Rules and Programme of Examinations for 1901 [41 and 42 Vic, c. 66, s, 6]
10 June
40 days
INDEX TO THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
[AUTHORISED EDITION].
SIXTH VOLUME OF SESSION 1901.
MAY 14;JUNE 10.
EXPLANATION OF ARRANGEMENT AND ABBREVIATIONS.
Bills: Read First, Second, or Third Time &#x003D; 1R., 2R., 3R. [c.] &#x003D; Commons. [l.] &#x003D; Lords. Amendt. &#x003D; Amendment. Os. &#x003D; Observations. Qs. &#x003D; Questions. As. &#x003D; Answers. Com. &#x003D; Committee. Con. &#x003D; Consideration. Where in the Index * is added with Reading of a Bill, or a Vote in Committee of Supply, it indicates that no Debate took place on that Stage of the Bill, or on that Vote. Subjects discussed in Committee of Supply are entered under their headings, and also under Members' Names, without reference to the actual Vote before the Committee.
A
Aberdeen
Post Office;Delay in Building new Post Office
O. Mr. Bryce, June 7, 1357.
Aberdeen, Earl
Betting;Inquiry, Motion for Select Committee, May 20, 547.
Abraham, Mr. W. [Cork Co., N. E.]
Dairy Industry in Cork, etc.;Proposed Loans to Farmers, June 10, 1469.
Mallow;Arbitration under Labourers Acts, Refusal of Local Government Board to appoint Mr. Byrne as Arbitrator, May 14, 56.
Mitchelstown Union;Labourers' Cottages in;Delay in Progress of Schemes, May 24, 1123.
Accessions
Oaths and Declarations made by Heads of States on Accession;Return
Delay in Presenting
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 988.
Return Presented, May 23, 950.
Achonry
United Irish League Meeting;Police Interference
Qs. Mr. O'Dowd, Capt. Donelan; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 57; Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 264.
Addis, Private J.
Death of, at Cork;Compassionate Allowance for Mother
Qs. Mr. Flynn, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Lord Stanley, May 21, 764.
Adjournment of the House
Friday, Rule as to moving Adjournment of the House after Supply had been disposed of, see Business of the House.
Whitsuntide
Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), May 23, 989.
Admiralty
First Lord;Earl of Selborne.
Secretary;Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster.
Civil Lord;Mr. E. G. Pretyman.
Afforesting
see titles Scotland, Ireland.
Afghan Tribal Feuds
Attack on South Waziris, see India;Frontier, North-West.
Africa, East
Zanzibar and Pemba, Slavery in;Correspondence Presented, June 6, 1212.
Africa, South
British or Boer Supremacy
References to in Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 636; May 21, 793; May 23, 1081.
Chinese Labour, Introduction of;Government Control, Poll-Tax on Chinese in Australasia, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 14, 46.
South African War, Transvaal, Orange River Colony, etc., see those titles.
Africa, West
Gold Coast, see that title.
Somaliland;Outbreak of Ogaden Somalis, Punitive Expedition;Correspondence relating to Murder of Mr. Jenner, Presented, May 21, 724, 760.
Uganda, see that title.
Agrarian Outrages, Ireland
Return, Number of Threatening Notices Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 781.
Agricultural Holdings Act
Arbitrators, Applications for
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 20, 593.
Agricultural Rating Act
"Doles"
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 644.
Petitions against re-enactment, June 7, 1311.
Renewal;Form of Bill
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 17, 460.
Agriculture
Central Chamber;Duration of Speeches O. Maj. Rasch, May 14, 132.
Compensation for Damage to Crops, etc., Bill, see that title.
Labour Contracts, Breach of;Amendment of Statute of Frauds
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 17, 453.
Agriculture, Board of
President;Rt. Hon. R. W. Hanbury.
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Department, Ireland
see Ireland.
Ailesbury, Marquess of
Rifle Ranges, closing at Swindon, May 17, 422.
Aldeburgh Corporation Water Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
Con. * June 6, 1209.
3R., June 10, 1450.
Aldershot
Military Prison, Expenditure on
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1165.
Sewage Farm, Expenditure on
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1166.
Aldershot Gas and Water Bill
c. 3R. * May 16, 233.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
Alfreton Gas Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
Con. * May 24, 1103.
3R. * June 7, 1310.
Aliens
Naturalisation;Return Presented, June 6, 1213.
Alkali, etc., Works Regulation Bill
l. Report, * May 14, 10; May 17, 421.
3R. * May 20, 572.
Allan, Mr. W. [Gateshead, N.]
Post Office Employees' Grievances, Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1379.
Allen, Mr. C. P. [Gloucester, Stroud]
Salisbury Plain, Expenditure on Fences etc., May 24, 1178.
Allotments
Irish Urban Districts;Legislation proposed
Q. Mr. Power; A. Mr. Wyndham May 23, 981.
Scotland;Proceedings of Parish and County Councils, Return
Q. Mr. E. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 24, 1120.
Alverstone, Lord;Lord Chief Justice
Prevention of Corruption (No. 2) Bill Intro., May 21, 741.
Ambrose, Dr. R. [Mayo, W.]
Connaught;Scheduling as Congested District, proposed, June 7, 1330.
Gun Licence;Refusal to grant Licence to P. Masterson, June 10, 1470.
Mallaranny Cattle Market;Mr. Stoney collecting Tolls and Customs, etc., Jun 10, 1470.
Newport, County Mayo;Number of Police, Religion, etc., June 10, 1471.
Rosmurrevagh;Erection of Pier proposed May 24, 1122.
Stoney's, Mr. V., Estate;Sale to Congested Districts Board, Seaweed Rights etc., May 17, 456.
Ammunition
Small Arms Ammunition, Reserve of;Deficiency on the outbreak of the South African War
Os. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, May 21, 834; Mr. A. J. Balfour, 840.
(see also titles Cartridges, Bullets, Cordite etc.)
Analyst
Ireland;Appointment of Government Analyst, proposed
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. Wyndham May 16, 265.
Ancient Laws of Ireland
see Brehon Laws.
Appropriations-in-Aid
Parliamentary Control
Os. Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1283.
Archdale, Mr. E. M. [Fermanagh, N.]
Butter Adulteration Prosecutions, etc., May 16, 256.
Architect to Education Department
see Education Department.
Ardrossan Gas and Water Order Confirmation Bill
c. 1R. * May 21, 757.
2R. * June 10, 1451.
Ardrossan Harbour Order Confirmation Bill
c. Con. * and 3R. * May 15, 170.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
3R., May 20, 536.
Argentina
Horses, Purchase for the British Army in South Africa;Comparison with Horses purchased elsewhere, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1250, 1259, 1260, 1263.
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Arizona Copper Company, Limited, Order Confirmation Bill
c. 1R. * May 20, 574.
Arklow
Street Preaching at;Case of T. Kearon, Imprisonment for Assault, etc.
Qs. Mr. Cogan, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1125.
Arlesey Gas Bill
c. Con. * May 17, 435.
Armadale
Pier, Construction of;Government Grant Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. Dickson, May 14, 53.
Armaments
"Policy Governs Armaments"
Os. Mr. Bryce, May 20, 711; Sir R. Reid, May 21, 796.
Arms Acts, Ireland
Refusal of Gun Licences, see Gun Licences.
Arms and Ammunition
Exportation since 1896;Return proposed
Q. Mr. Jacoby; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 17, 443.
see also titles Bullets, Cartridges, Cordite, etc.
Army
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. St. John Brodrick.
Under Secretary;Lord Raglan.
Financial Secretary;Lord Stanley.
Addis, J., Death of, at Cork, see sub-heading Compassionate Allowances.
Africa, South, Military Forces, Numbers since 1899&#x2013;1901;Return Presented, May 17, 400; May 20, 578.
Age Regulation, see sub-heading Recruits.
Aldershot, see that title.
Ammunition, see titles Cartridges, Bullets, etc.
Army Corps;Six Corps Organisation
O. Lord Tweedmouth, May 21, 751.
Barracks, see that title.
Brodrick's, Mr., Resolution and Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman's Amendment, May 14, 66; May 16, 281.
Commanders replacing present Officers;Extension of Powers
Q. Sir A. Hayter; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 954.
Definition of "Army Corps"
Os. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 300; Mr. Asquith, 318; Mr. A. J. Balfour, 379.
Barracks, see that title, also Names of Barracks.
Buildings, Repairs, etc., Vote for, May 24, 1165.
Bullets;Mark IV. Ammunition, etc., see title Bullets.
Cadet Corps, see that title.
Canteen Fund and the Disbandment of Reserve Regiments
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1214.
Cartridges, see that title.
Chaplains
Hong Kong, Appointment of Chaplain Q. Mr. B. Hoare; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 246.
Royal Arsenals;Salaries, Denominations, etc.
Os. Mr. Taylor, June 6, 1290, 1296; Lord Stanley, 1290.
Colonies, see that title.
Commissions;Promotions from the Ranks, see that sub-heading.
Compassionate Allowances
Addis, J.;Compassionate Allowance for Mother
Qs. Mr. Flynn, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Lord Stanley, May 21, 764.
Hannah, Private, Case of
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Lord Stanley, May 23, 955.
Conscription
O. Mr. Bryce, May 20, 706.
References to in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 73, 93, 98; May 16, 349, 360, 373.
Cost of Living in the Army, see subheading Officers;Expenses.
Death Duties on Officers' Estates, see Death Duties.
Education of Soldiers for Civil Life
Monkswell's, Lord, Motion, May 20, 556.
Officers' Duties and Technical Instruction, 562, 564.
Recruiting;Effect of Technical Instruction of Soldiers, 560, 564.
Winter v. Summer Classes, 557, 565.
Woolwich Experiment, 558, 563, 566.
Employment of Discharged Soldiers, see title Soldiers.
Engineers' Services
Increase in Expenditure
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1173.
Vote for, May 24, 1165; June 6, 1301.
Expenditure
Churchill's, Lord R., agitation for economy in 1886, see Churchill.
Colonial Contributions towards Defence of the Empire, see Defence of the Empire.
Increase in by present Administration Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 620; May 21, 795; May 23, 1052.
References to in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 69, 95; May 16, 307, 322, 354, 358, 381.
Garrison Battalions for Service in the Mediterranean, etc.
Barrack Accommodation at Malta and Gibraltar, see titles Malta and Gibraltar.
Consulting Governments of Malta and Gibraltar
Q. Mr. C. Hobhouse; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 585.
Desertions
Q. Mr. C. Warner; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 955.
Married Establishments, Cost of
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 50.
Officers, Selection of
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 50.
South Africa, Stationing Battalion in Os. Mr. A. Lee, May 14, 72; Lord Stanley, 89; Capt. Jessel, May 16, 340.
Guns;Purchased in Germany, Votes in Supply
Q. Mr. E. J. C. Morton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1321.
Horses, see that title.
India, see that title.
Industrial School Boys, see sub-heading Recruits.
Invalided Soldiers from South Africa;Pensions and Allowances
Q. Mr. Levy; A. Lord Stanley, May 21, 763.
King's Bastion, Portsmouth, Destruction of Q. Lord Balcarres; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 585.
Lessons of the War, see South African War.
Maps of South Aftica, see South African War.
Medal, Cretan Campaign, Allowing Troops to wear
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 10, 1461.
Medical Corps
Committee of Experts, Appointment of
Q. Sir J. Tuke; A. Lord Stanley, May 17, 441.
Report of Committee;Date of Publication
Q. Sir J. Tuke; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 584.
Medical Officers;Reserve Officers, Extending Privilege of Army Reserve Officers to re-employed Reserve Medical Officers
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 49.
Military Convicts from South Africa in Civil Prisons, see Prisons.
Military Policy;Over-sea Requirements of the Empire
Colomb, Sir J., on, May 14, 107.
Military Savings Banks;Statement Presented, June 7, 1314.
Militia, see that title.
Motor Cars v. Horses
Os. Mr. Sinclair, June 6, 1248; Lord Stanley, 1254; Mr. Scott-Montagu, 1261.
Munitions supplied to India and the Colonies, Vote for;Question of Parliamentary Control
Os. Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1283.
Netley Hospital, see that title.
Officers
Expenses;Cost of living in the Army, etc.
Os. Sir A. Hayter, May 16, 288; Mr. Pirie, 347.
Education and Training of Officers
Debate (Lords), May 21, 742.
References to in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 85, 90; May 16, 348.
Generals, Powers and Training of, under new Scheme
References to in Debate on Army Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 125; May 16, 283, 298, 319, 336.
Ordnance Factories
Forging Press at Woolwich;Construction, Progress of Work, etc.
O. Mr. Stuart Wortley, June 6, 1290.
Productive Power, Responsibility for Quality of Work Done, Salaries, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1281, 1282, 1283, 1284, 1285, 1286.
Vote for, June 6, 1279.
Organisation, see sub-heading Reforms and Reorganisation.
Pay;Private Soldiers' Pay
Details showing how the Amount of 30s. is arrived at
Q. Sir S. Crossley; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 245.
Deductions from
Q. Lord H. Bentinck; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 245.
O. Lord tweedmouth, May 21, 750.
First payment of one shilling a day and food
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 51.
Increase in, Additional Privileges, etc., proposed
References to in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 73, 85, 98; May 16, 288, 329, 332, 336, 342, 344, 352, 372.
Physical Standard of Recruits, see subheading Recruits.
Promotions from the Ranks, etc.
Os. Mr. Dillon, May 14, 86; Mr. Pirie, May 16, 347.
Queensferry, North, Fortifications;Boundary Fence
Qs. Mr. J. Hope, Lord Balcarres; As. Lord Stanley, May 17, 442.
Recruiting
References to in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 72, 80, 85; May 16, 286, 301, 321, 330, 345, 349, 352, 365, 367, 371, 375.
Technical Instruction of Soldiers, Effect on Recruiting
Os. Lord Monkswell, May 20, 560; Lord Raglan, 564.
Recruits
Age Regulations;Under-age Recruits, Decision of Commanding Officer, etc.
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 584.
Industrial Schools;Boys drafted into Army without Consent of Father
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 10, 1465.
Physical Standards required;Number of Specials Recruited
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Lord Stanley, May 21, 765.
Reforms and Reorganisation;Government Proposals
Brodrick's, Mr., Resolution and Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman's Amendment, May 14, 66; May 16, 281.
(for Details of Debate, see their sub-headings under Army.)
Debate (Lords), May 21, 742.
Discussion, Extending over another day Proposed
Q. Sir J. Dickson-Poynder; A.
Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 15, 232.
Garrison Battalions, see that subheading.
Legislation required
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 21, 765.
War Office Reform, see title War Office.
Regimental Titles;Naming Regiments after Colonies which had sent Troops to South Africa
Q. Sir C. Cayzer; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 582.
Reserve
References to in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 76; May 16, 305, 307, 340.
Reserve Regiments, Royal;Disbandment of Lancers, Canteen Fund Balance
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1214.
Rifles and Rifle Ranges, see those titles.
Salisbury Plain, see that title.
Shorncliffe, Military Disturbance at Q Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1321.
Soldiers' Pay, see sub-heading Pay.
Stores;Reserve of Small Arm Ammunition, Weekly Output, etc.
Qs. Mr. Norman, Major Rasch; As. Mr. Brodrick, May 20, 580.
(see also titles Cartridges and Bullets.)
Technical Instruction for Soldiers, see subheading Education of Soldiers for Civil Life.
Time-expired Men in South Africa and India, see titles South African War and India.
Transport Service, see that title.
Veterinary Department
Re-organisation
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1272, 1276.
Strengthen in the Department, etc.
O. Capt. Norton, June 7, 1433.
Victualling Yard, see sub-heading Deptford.
Volunteers, see. that title.
War Office, see that title.
Wellington College-Report of Governors for 1900 Presented, May 20, 540, 577.
Yeomanry, see that title.
Army Estimates
Engineers' Services, etc.;£;3,281,000, Com., May 24, 1165; Rep., June 6, 1301.
Ordnance Factories;£;345, 000, Com., June 6, 1279.
Procedure, etc.
Details, Lack of
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1223, 1227, 1230, 1232, 1235, 1238, 1240, 1257.
Parliamentary Control;Army Ordnance Factory Vote, Munitions supplied to India and the Colonies
Os. Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1283.
Unexpended Balances;Carrying forward
O. Mr. G. Bowles, June 6, 1224.
Supplementary Estimates;Estimates Voted since 1890, Return Presented, May 20, 578.
Transport and Remounts;£;15, 977, 000, Com., June 6, 1220.
Arnold-Forster, Mr. H. O.;Secretary to the Admiralty [Belfast, W.]
Cruisers, Construction of fast Cruisers;Speed of Russian Cruiser "Varyag," etc., May 23, 957.
Deptford Victualling Yard;Rum Drawers, Wages, May 20, 587.
Marines
Commissions from the Ranks;In-eligibility for Appointments of Barrack-master and Paymaster, May 14, 51.
Promotion of Majors for Service in China, May 14, 51.
Victualling;Report of Departmental Committee, May 21, 767.
Warrant Officers;War Honours, May 17, 441.
West India Dock Naval Stores;Packers' Fay, May 20, 586; May 21, 767.
Arran, Earl of
Representative Peer for Ireland, May 14, 1; May 17, 397.
Arranmore Island
Land Commission Sittings;Hearing Cases at Dungloe, etc.
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 977.
Arsenals, Royal
Chaplains;Denominations, Salaries, etc. Os. Mr. Taylor, June 6, 1290, 1296; Lord Stanley, 1290.
Art Galleries
Sunday Opening, Conditions of;Engagement of Officials
Q. Col. Milward; A. Mr. A. Chamberliin, May 23, 975.
Ascension Day
Sittings of Committees in the House
Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), May 15, 173.
Ashton, Mr. T. G. [Beds Luton]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 671.
Local Taxation;Aid from Imperial Sources in 1900, etc., May 17, 453.
Transvaal Gold Mines;Taxation, May 24, 1112.
Asiatic Labour
Queensland, see that title.
Asquith, Rt. Hon. H. H. [Fife, E.]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 312, 381.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 666.
Larceny Bill, 2R., June 10, 1546.
"Assyrian"
Wreck of;Nationality of Crew, inquiry proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 10, 1466.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. J.;Attorney-General for Ireland [Londonderry, N.]
Ballivor Petty Sessions;Hedge-cutting Prosecutions, Dismissal of Summonses, May 17, 455.
Boyle Town Commissioners;Fair and Market Regulations, etc., May 20, 605; May 21, 782.
Charitable Loans Act, 1900;Method of making out accounts, Magistrates' Instructions to Clerks, etc., May 23, 983; May 24, 1127.
Kilmallock Petty Sessions House;Refusing use of Court to District Council, May 21, 780.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R. May 22, 931, 934, 937.
Law Courts;Regulations for distribution of Business, May 23, 983; May 24, 1127.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill 2R., May 15, 183, 213.
Trawling off County Louth;Re-enacting disallowed Bye-law, May 21, 782.
Valuation of Property;Privy Council Order of Jan, 30, 1899, Applying to General Revaluation, May 21, 783.
Attorney-General
Rt. Hon. Sir R. Finlay.
Attorney-General for Ireland
Rt. Hon. J. Atkinson.
Australasia
Horses, Purchase for the Army;Comparison with Horses purchased elsewhere
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1248, 1251.
Queensland, Asiatic Labour, Bill Prohibiting;;Royal Sanction refused
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 7, 1322.
South African War, see that title.
Austria-Hungary
Horses, Purchase for the Imperial Yeomanry in South Africa;Charges of Corrupt Practices against British Officers, Inquiry, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1246, 1249, 1250, 1254, 1255, 1260, 1265.
Sugar Industry of Bohemia;Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Ayr County Buildings Provisional Order Confirmation Bill
l. 1R. * June 10, 1439.
Ayr Harbour Order Confirmation Bill
c. Con. * and 3R. * May 15, 171.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
3R. * May 20, 539.
B
Baden
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1442.
Baden-Powell's Police
see South African Constabulary.
Badluachrach
Road Construction;Application for Grant
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 969.
Balcarres, Lord [Lancashire, Chorley]
Cowley Leper Hospital;Action of Charity Commissioners, May 17, 499.
King's Bastion Portsmouth, Destruction of, May 20, 585.
Postage Stamps;Designs for New Stamps, Entrusting to Austrian Artist, May 23, 975.
Queensferry, North, Fortifications;Boundary Fence, May 17, 443.
Balfour, Capt. C. B. [Middlesex, Hornsey]
Berwickshire County Town Bill, 2R., June 10, 1549.
Balfour, Major Kenneth [Christchurch]
Post Office Employees' Grievances, Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1381.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J.;First Lord of the Treasury [Manchester, W.]
Agricultural Rating and Tithe Rent Acts;Renewal, May 17, 460.
Army Organisation Resolution;Extending Debate over another day, May 15, 232; May 16, 374.
Ascension Day;Sittings of Committees, May 15, 173.
Beer Bill;Referring to Grand Committee, Memorial of Apr, 23, May 20, 610; May 84, 1131.
Business of the House;
Course of Business, May 16, 276, 277; May 17, 461; May 20, 611; May 21, 784; May 24, 1132; June 6, 1219, 1220; June 7, 1334, 1435; June 10, 1474.
Statement on Motion for Whitsuntide Recess, May 23, 989, 1001.
China;Indemnity, Basing upon Expenses incurred, etc., May 20, 608.
Church Discipline Bill;Affording special Facilities for Debate, May 20, 611.
Civil List Bill, Cum. June 10, 1492, 1532.
Declarations of Heads of States on Accession;Return, May 23, 988.
Derby Day Adjournment;"Discreditable" Practice of Adjourning for Derby Day, etc., May 23, 990.
Factory and Workshops Bill;Date of Second Reading, May 23, 987.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 621, 622, 717; May 21, 838.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme
Committee of Inquiry, etc.
Resignation of Member, June 7, 1333.
Result of Inquiry, May 20, 610.
Naval Works Bill, May 24, 1132.
Opportunity for Discussion, May 21, 784.
Housing of the Working Classes and Workmen's Trains;Government Pledges, May 20, 609.
Ireland;University Education Commission, Names of Members, May 24, 1129; June 7, 1331.
Local Taxation, Royal Commission on;Report, June 10, 1474.
Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister Bill, Adjournment of the House to a later Date than that fixed for Com. Stage, May 16, 275.
Metric System, Use of;Report of Consul at La Rochelle, May 23, 989.
Municipal Trading;Reappointment of Committee, May 20, 610.
Patent Acts Committee of Inquiry, Recommendations of;Legislation proposed, May 14, 63.
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, Parliamentary Pressure, etc., June 7, 1381.
Prayers, Form of, used in House of Commons, Person Responsible for, May 24, 1130.
Questions in the House
Answers, Placing in the Library propose I;Expediting "Hansard" Report, June 7, 1332.
Asking at the end of Public Business proposed, May 20, 607.
Records, Preservation of Local Records;Report of Treasury Committee, May 20, 608.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill;Government Intentions, May 16, 276; May 23, 988.
South African War, Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War, May 16, 237.
Supply Procedure;Reports of Supply, Staling on the "Orders of the Day" particular Votes to be Reported, May 14, 64.
Teachers;Security of Tenure, Legislation proposed, May 23, 988.
War Office Organisation;Report of Committee, Opportunity for Discussion, June 7, 1331; June 10, 1473.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. G. W.;President of the Hoard of Trade [Leeds, Central]
Arms and Ammunition, etc., Exportation since 1896;Return proposed, May 17, 443.
"Assyrian," Wreck of;Nationality and Behaviour of Crew, etc., June 10, 1466.
Cheque Bank Liquidation;Delay in Settling Claims, June 7, 1326.
Commercial Law, Codification of, May 24, 1120.
Cycles and Railway Companies;London and North-Western Railway Company, Compensation for Damage refused, May 24, 1119.
Irish Questions
Great Southern and Western Railway Company;Through Rates for Irish Produce, etc., May 17, 459; May 24, 1129.
Lights, Commissioners of;Second Class Clerks, proposed Increase of Pay, May 24, 1128.
Metric System;Reports of Consular Agents, Legislation proposed, June 7, 1327.
"Moel Tryran," Loss of, May 16, 256.
Railways;Brake Trials on Great Western Railway, May 16, 253.
Seamen
Able-bodied Seamen;Proof of Service, Board of Trade Powers, etc., May 16, 254, 255.
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers;Accommodation, etc., June 7, 1409, 1410, 1416.
Manning of Merchant Ships
Committee on Manning;Recommendations of, May 16, 255.
Number of Inefficiently Manned Ships lost in the last Twenty Years, May 16, 254.
Regulations;Proportion of Able-bodied Seamen, etc., May 21, 773.
"Runic," s. s.;Case of Seaman Dean, May 20, 591.
Sugar Duty;Classification of Sugar in Board of Trade Returns, May 16, 251.
Balfour of Burleigh, Lold;Secretary for Scotland
Falkirk and District Tramways Order Confirmation Bill, 3R., June 10, 1439.
Private Bill Procedure (Scotland) Act;Opposition in the House of Lords, interval between First and Third Readings;Ardrossan Harbour Order Confirmation Bill, 3R., May 20, 537.
Ballincollig Barracks
Condition of
O. Col. Legge, May 24, 1173.
Ballivor
Petty Sessions;Hedge-cutting Prosecutions, Dismissal of Summonses, etc.
Q. Mr. Carew; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 17, 455.
Baltimore
Mail Service from Skibbereen;Delay in Delivery of Letters
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 21, 783.
O. Mr. Gilhooly, June 10, 1566.
Banbury, Mr. F. G. [Camberwell, Peckham]
Church in Wales;Disestablishment, May 21, 880.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 150.
Mail Carts, Horses employed in;Inferior Horses, June 7, 1395.
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Inquiry by Committee, proposed, June 7, 1396.
Telephone Service, London;Date of Completion, Unloading Materials at Night, etc, May 16, 263.
Bank of England
National Debt Office, Payment to the Bank of England as Agents
Os. Mr. J. P. Farrell, May 17, 515; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 518.
Ways and Means Advances;Rate of Interest paid, 1899&#x2013;1901
Q. Mr. Loyd; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 24, 1116.
Barbour, Sir D.
Transvaal and Orange River Colony, Finances;Report Presented, June 7, 1314; June 10, 1443, 1454.
Barmaids
Hours of Labour of London Barmaids
Q. Mr. S. Smith; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 16, 252.
Barnard, Lord
Queen Anne's Bounty Board, Constitution of, etc., Inquiry;Reappointment of Joint Committee, May 14, 35.
Barracks
Expenditure on
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1165.
Six Army Corps Organisation;Barrack Accommodation, Cost, etc.
Os. Mr. Freeman-Thomas, May 14, 103; Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 299.
(see also titles Malta and Gibraltar.)
(for particular Barracks, see their names.)
Barrow-in-Furness Corporation Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 21, 722.
Barry Railway Bill
c. 2R. * June 6, 1209.
Bartley, Mr. G. C. T. [Islington, N.]
Boer Prisoner in St. Helena shot by Sentry, etc., May 21, 702.
Sugar Duty;English made Glucose, Delay in levying Duty on, etc., May 16, 251.
Telephone Service, London;Date of Completion, May 16, 263.
Bath Gas Light and Coke Bill
c 2R. * May 15, 169.
Report, * May 23, 948.
3R, * June 6, 1209.
Bathurst, Mr. A. B. [Gloucester, Cirencester]
Durban, Plague at;St. Helena, Prohibition of Landing Persons and Stores from Durban, etc, May 16, 238.
Bayley, Mr. T. [Derbyshire, Chesterfield]
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill, 2R. May 17, 432.
Post Office Employees' Grievances, June 7, 1366.
South African Concessions Committee;Report, Date of Issue, May 17, 441.
Beach, Rt. Hon. Sir M. Hicks;Chancellor of the Exchequer [Bristol, W.]
Bonded Warehouses;Fortifying Wines. Duty Charged, etc., May 23, 961.
Retail Purchaser ascertaining Percentage of Spirit, May 24, 1117.
Civil List Bill, Com. June 10, 1502, 1508, 1514, 1520, 1523, 1527, 1531.
Coal Export Duty
Mining Association of Great Britain;Resolution, May 20, 591.
Quality of Coal;Unequal Incidence of Duty, May 16, 252.
Remission;Coal Shipped under Contracts made before Apr, 18, etc., May 24, 1117.
Death Duties;Army Officers' Estates
Amount on Estates of Officers who have died on Active Service since October, 1899, May 16, 250.
Officers Dying on Active Service, Proposed Rebate, May 23, 962.
Deficiency Borrowings, Interest on, May 20, 590; May 24, 1116.
Finance Bill, 2R. May 20, 618, 623, 627, 628, 629, 631, 633, 656; May 21, 796, 818, 838; May 23, 1063, 1064, 1067, 1083, 1084.
Income Tax;Abatements, Loss to the Exchequer, etc., May 16, 249.
Law Courts, Ireland;Cash Balance, Proposed Loans to Irish Industries, May 24, 1128.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposals.
Glucose.
Customs and Excise Duties, Inequality of, June 10, 1464.
English made Glucose;Delay in levying Duty, etc., May 16, 251.
Increased Charges by Dealers, May 17, 450.
Molasses and Glucose, Alterations in Duties;Supplementary Statement in Committee of Ways and Means, June 10, 1075, 1480, 1489.
Molasses for Cattle Feeding;Reduction of Duty proposed, May 16, 250.
Peppermint Creams, Consignment of;Delay in levying Duty, May 16, 251.
Taxation;Collections in England and Scotland, Delay in collecting Taxes in England, May 23, 962.
Welsh Gold Mining Royalties, May 23, 962.
Beer Bill
Petitions, June 7, 1311.
Referring to Grand Committee, etc, proposed;Memorial of Apr, 23
Qs. Mr. Chaplin; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 610; May 24, 1130.
Belfast
Surveyor of Taxes Office, Chief Clerk in;Placing on Permanent Staff of Civil Service, proposed
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 24, 1121.
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill
c. Ordered, May 21, 758.
1R. * May 23, 946.
Belgium
Locomotives;Egyptian Railways, Repairs, Consumption of Fuel, etc.
O. Sir A. Hickman, May 23, 1025.
Workmen, Facilities of Locomotion;Report Presented June 6, 1212.
Bell, Mr. R. [Derby]
Postal Employees' Grievances, June 7, 1374.
Belper, Lord
Habitual Drunkards' Bill, Com., May 17, 403, 405, 406, 407, 409, 410, 411, 413, 414, 415.
Licensing Boards Bill, 2R., May 14, 15, 23, 33; May 17, 416, 417, 419, 420.
Benefices
Union of Benefices Act
St. George, Botolph Lane and Saint Botolph, Billingsgate;Scheme for effecting union Presented, June 6, 1214.
St. Mary-at-Hill and St. Andrew Hubbard;scheme for effecting union Presented, June 6, 1214.
Bengal
Poppy Cultivation, Increase of;Discouraging Manufacture of Opium.
Q. Mr. S. Smith; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 23, 958.
Bentinck, Lord H. [Nottingham, S.]
Soldiers' Pay;Deductions, May 16, 245.
Bermuda
Annual Report Presented, May 20, 540, 578.
Berwickshire County Town Bill
c. 2R., June 10 1547.
Bethlem Hospital Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 127.
Betting
Public Betting;Select Committee of Inquiry, proposed motion (Bishop of Hereford), May 20, 541.
Bexley Tramways Bill
c. Con. * May 14, 37.
3R. * May 17, 435.
1R. * May 20, 535.
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M. [Bethnal Green, N. E.]
Bombay Victoria Technical Institute;Sending Mechanical Engineer from Europe, etc., May 20, 587.
British Indian Subjects in South Africa Allowing Refugees to return to the Transvaal, May 14, 45.
Invalidating Boer Regulations, May 24, 1113.
Manual Industries in India, Development of;Mr. Chatterton's Memorandum, May 20, 588.
Bideford and Clovelly Railway (Abandonment) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 126.
2R. * June 6, 1209.
Biggleswade Water Board Bill
c. Ordered, May 21, 758.
1R. * May 23, 946.
2R. * June 6, 1209.
Bigwood, Mr. J. [Middlesex, Brentford]
London United Tramways Bill;Instruction to Committee, May 15, 170.
Bilbao
Trade Report Presented, May 17, 400.
Billinghay
Infant School;Excessive Caning
Q. Sir J. Brunner; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 20, 594.
Bingley Urban District Council Bill
c. Con. * May 14, 37.
3R. * May 20, 573.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Birmingham
Irvine, Dr. H. W.;Appointment as Inspector of Schools
Os. Mr. M'Kenna, May 23, 1036; Mr. J. Chamberlain, 1038; Sir W. Foster, 1042; Sir J. Gorst, 1047.
King Edward VI. Grammar School;Management Scheme Presented, June 6, 1213.
Birmingham (City) Tramways Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 14, 2.
3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Birr and Portumna Railway
Restoring and Working;Government Advance
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 274.
Bishoprics
India, Central Provinces;New Bishopric, proposed, Cost to Indian Exchequer
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 16, 247.
Blackburn Corporation Bill
c. Report, * June 7, 1311.
Blackpool Improvement Bill
c. Report, * May 22, 882.
Con. * June 7, 1311.
Blake, Mr. E. [Longford, S.]
Hamilton Burgh Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, Con., June 10, 1449.
Lord President of the Council, Salary, Duties, etc., May 17, 471.
Blenheim, Battle of
Marlborough's, Duke of, Account written on back of a Washing Bill
Os. Sir E. Vincent, May 20, 660; Mr. Labouchere, 662.
Blind
Destitute Blind, Petition for Legislation) May 16, 234.
Education of the Blind (Scotland) Bill, see that title.
Board Schools, Scotland
see Education, Scotch Questions.
Bohemia
Sugar Industry, Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Boland, Mr. J. [Kerry, S.]
Ancient Laws of Ireland;Publication of remaining Volumes, Date of, etc., May 14, 61.
Kenmare Constabulary and Harvest Work;Assisting District Inspector, May 21, 777.
Maltese Language Question;Correspondence relating to, etc., May 20, 589.
Warden Estate, Co. Kerry;Valuators raising Rent of P. Sullivan, May 20, 600.
Bolton
Pupil Teachers' Central Classes;Payment at Evening Rates
Q. Mr. Harwood; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 967.
Bolton Corporation Bill
l. Report, * May 20, 534.
Bombay
Victoria Technical Institute;Obtaining Mechanical Engineer from Europe, etc.
Q. Sir M. Bhownaggree; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 20, 587.
Bond, Mr. E. [Nottingham, E.]
Building Bye-laws;Revision of Rural and Urban Bye-laws by Local Government Board, May 14, 52.
Bond-Blaine Convention
see Newfoundland.
Bonded Warehouses
Fortifying Wine
Duty Charged, etc.
Qs. Mr. J. O'Connor, Mr. T. M.
Healy; As. Sir M. H. Beach, May 23, 960.
Retail Purchaser ascertaining amount of Spirit, etc.
Qs. Mr. J. O'Connor, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Sir M. H. Beach, May 24, 1117.
Boracic Acid in Milk
see Butter Adulteration.
Bordeaux
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Borough Funds Act (1872) Amendment (London) Bill
Petitions, June 7, 1311; June 10, 1451.
Boscawen, Mr. Griffith [Kent, Tunbridge]
Charities, Administration by the Commissioners, etc.
Cowley Leper Hospital, May 17, 500.
Endowed School Work, May 17, 501.
Inquiries, Compiling List of Charities;Inquiry in Wiltshire, June 10, 1468.
Investments of Charitable Funds, May 17, 503, 504.
Landed Property, Sale of, May 17, 500; May 23, 971.
St. Katherine's Hospital, May 17, 502.
Trustees, Nonconformist disqualification;St. Cross Hospital, Winchester, May 17, 487.
Botanical Work Committee
Report with Minutes of Evidence, etc., Ordered, May 24, 1108;Presented, June 6, 1213.
"Bouncing" Policy of the Government
Os. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, May 21, 835; Mr. A. J. Balfour, 840.
Bowles, Mr. T. G [Lynn Regis]
Appropriations-in-Aid;Parliamentary Control, June 6, 1278, 1283.
Army Estimates
Lack of Details on Transports and Remounts Vote, June 6, 1223.
Parliamentary Control;Ordnance Vote, Munitions supplied to India and the Colonies, etc., June 6, 1283.
Unexpended Balances, Carrying forward, June 6, 1224.
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, Invasion of Private Members Rights, May 23, 1006.
Civil List Bill, Com., June 10, 1532.
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1139, 1148.
Finance;Deficiency Borrowings, Interest on, May 20, 590.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 667.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme
Naval Works Bill, Introduction of, May 24, 1132.
Opportunity for Discussion, May 21, 784; June 7, 1334.
Report of Inquiry, May 20, 610.
Inland Revenue Department;Irritating Annoyances in connection with the collection of Establishment Licences, June 7, 1345.
Lord President of the Council's Private Secretary, Salary, Duties, etc.;Dual Appointment, May 17, 473, 474.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1480.
Supply Procedure;Reports of Supply, Sating on "Orders of the Day" particular Votes to be Reported, May 14, 64.
Turkey;Foreign Post Offices, Right of Maintaining, etc., May 17, 446.
Boyle
Town Commissioners' Bye-Laws
Fair and Market Regulations and Local Government Board
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 21, 782.
Records at Dublin Castle, etc.
Q. Mr. Tally; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 20, 605.
Boyle, Mr. J. [Donegal, W.]
Arranmore Island;Land Commission Sittings, Hearing Cases at Dungloe, May 23, 977.
Style's, Sir W., Estate, County Donegal;Sale to Tenants, Fee for Land Certificate, May 23, 977.
Bradford
All Saints' School Accommodation;Recognised Accommodation for 816 children
Q. Mr. Wanklyn; A Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 967.
Bradford Corporation Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 949.
Con. * June 7, 1311.
Brake Trials on Railways
see Railways.
Brawling
Charge against Catterell, at Croydon;Sending Bill to Grand Jury
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 21, 772.
Brazil
Trade Report Presented, May 20, 540.
Brehon Laws
Publication of remaining Volumes
O. Mr. T. M. Healy, May 15, 186.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 61.
Brest
Trade Report Presented, May 17, 400.
Bridewell Hospital Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 127.
Brigg, Mr. J. [York, W. R., Keighley]
Excise and Customs Duties devoted to Technical Education, Cost of Collection, June 7, 1344.
Metric System, use of;Report of Consul at La Rochelle, May 23, 988.
Morca;Imports of British Goods, May 17, 447.
Brighton Corporation Bill
c. Report, * May 14, 41.
Bristol, Clifton and West of England Zoological Society Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 438.
3R. * May 23, 945.
Bristol Corporation Cemetery Bill
l. Report, * May 20, 534.
British Empire
Expansion of Empire;Increase in National Expenditure
Os. Mr. Bryce, May 20, 716; Mr. Hanbury, May 21, 801.
Military Responsibilities
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 646; May 21, 795.
"Vulnerable and Scattered Character of the Empire and the Universality of our Commerce"
Os. Lord Stanley, May 14, 95, 107; Sir J. Colomb, 106.
British Gas Light Company Bill
c. Con. * May 17, 435.
3R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
British Indian Refugees
Return to the Transvaal, see Transvaal.
British South Africa Company
Jameson Raid Indemnity, see that title.
Broadhurst, Mr. H. [Leicester]
Postmaster-General sitting in House of Lords, Objections to, June 10, 1565.
South African War;Railway Servants' Set vices, Recognition of, May 23, 1027.
Transvaal;Native Labour Question, Formation of Syndicate, May 23, 1027.
Broadstairs and St. Peter's Water and Improvement Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 17, 398.
3R. * May 21, 722.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. W. St. John;Secretary of State for War [Surrey, Guild-ford]
Army Corps;Six Army Corps Organisation
Commanders replacing present Officers;Extension of Powers, etc., May 23, 954.
Cost, May 16, 358.
Army Estimates, Parliamentary Control;Ordnance Vote and Munitions supplied to India and the Colonies, etc., June 6, 1283.
Buildings voted by Parliament last year for the Troops which were unnecessary, alleged, May 14, 116.
Bullets;Mark IV. Ammunition, Withdrawal from South Africa, Effect of, on the Supply of Ammunition, May 23, 1030.
Cadet Corps Commanders;Honorary Rank and Volunteer Decoration, May 24, 1115.
Cartridges;Reserve of Small Arm Ammunition, May 20, 581; May 23, 1029.
Churchill, Mr. W.;"Hereditary desire to run Imperialism on the cheap," May 16, 310.
Coaling Stations;Garrisoning with Marines, etc, May 16, 243.
Colonies;Inviting Colonies to raise Regular Corps for Service in Imperial Army, May 20, 583.
Cretan Campaign Medal, Allowing Troops to wear, June 10, 1462.
Engineers' Services, Increase in Vote, May 24, 1174.
Garrison Battalions for Service in the Mediterranean
Desertion, May 23, 955.
Gibraltar and Malta;Barrack Accommodation, Married Quarters, May 24, 1200.
Married Establishments, Cost of, May 14, 50.
Officers, Selection of, May 14, 50.
Guns, Purchase of Field Guns in Germany;Votes in Supply, June 7, 1322.
India;Number of time-expired Men, May 23, 956.
Lee, ex-Private;Ill-treatment at Netley Hospital, alleged, May 14, 49.
Machinery and Buildings, Amount for Depreciation, etc., June 6, 1283.
Medical Officers;Re-employed Reserve Officers, Eligibility for Promotion, etc., May 14, 49.
Ordnance Factories;Responsibility for Work, etc., June 6, 1282, 1283.
Pay;Private Soldiers' Pay, First Payment of one shilling a-day and Food, May 14, 51.
Recruits, Number of Jan.;May, 1900 and 1901, May 14, 51.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 290.
Legislation Required, May 21, 765.
Reserve Regiments, Lancers;Canteen Fund Balance, Expenditure of, June 6, 1215.
Rifle Ranges, Provision of;Empowering Local Authorities to take Land for Ranges, etc., June 6, 1303.
Salisbury Plain, Expenditure on, May 24, 1178.
Shorncliffe, Military Disturbance at, June 7, 1321.
South African War
Australian Contingents;Hospital Treatment Complaints, May 14, 47.
Boers Killed and Wounded, June 7, 1315.
Cart Animals, etc.;Estimated proceeds of Sale, June 6, 1277.
Casualty Lists;Withholding Particulars of Battles and Dates, June 7, 1317.
Cost of the War;Amount paid to Contractors, June 7, 1317.
Crops and Grass, Destruction of, May 20, 579.
Farm-burning
Cape Colony, number burnt, May 24, 1109.
De Wet's, Gen., House, Destruction of, May 24, 1110.
Discontinuance of, etc., June 10, 1458.
Reasons assigned in the Return, etc., May 20, 579; May 23, 952.
Horses sent to South Africa
Kitchener's, Lord, Opinion as to Remounts, Transports, etc., June 7, 1432.
Purchasing;Charges of Corruption against British Officers, June 6, 1249, 1250, 1252, 1262, 1265.
Reserve of, June 6, 1262, 1264.
Information with reference to the situation in South Africa, May 23 1028, 1034.
Kitchener, Lord, Correspondence with Colonial Office and War Office June 7, 1318.
Lindley Disaster;Imperial Yeomanry 10th Battalion, Failure to relieve Col. Spragge's Force, June 10, 1458.
Military Convicts;Confinement in Civil Prisons, June 7, 1316.
Natives, Employment of Armed Natives by the Boers;Treatment of Natives, etc., June 10, 1455.
Peace Negotiations with Gen. Botha, June 7, 1318.
Prisoners;Boer
India;Sending Prisoners to Ah-mednagar, etc., May 23, 1032.
St. Helena;Prisoner Shot by Sentry, etc., May 21, 763.
Treatment of, Previous to Landing in St. Helena, May 14, 48.
Punishment and Imprisonment for Breach of Military Discipline;Sleeping on Duty, Imprisonment in Civil Prisons, etc., June 7, 1316.
Rebels, Trial of Cape Colony Rebels;Exclusion of Reporters of "South African News," June 7, 1315.
Refuge Camps
Cape Colony, May 24, 1108.
Condition of, Mortality among Children, etc., May 24, 1183, 1196.
Return of Troops;Number of Officers compared with Men, June 7, 1429.
Roberts, Lord, Plot to Kidnap;Police Agent Gano's connection with, etc., May 14, 47.
Stock Farms, Establishment of, by the Government, May 23, 1035; May 24, 1111.
Strength of British Regiments in South Africa, May 23, 953.
Time-expired Men, Number of, May 23, 955.
Typhoid Fever and Plague Statistics, May 23, 951.
Volunteers
Cambridge University, Number of Members Volunteering;Offer of Commissions, etc., May 24, 1108.
Officers;Army Rank, Granting Honorary Rank, June 10, 1460.
Wiltshire Volunteer Service Company;War Gratuity Grievance, June 7, 1315.
War News;False News
Correspondents, allowing to go to the Front, etc., June 10, 1456.
Vlakfontein Engagement, June 7, 1320.
Zulu Cattle Raids under British Authority, alleged, May 23, 952, 1032.
Transport Service
Cost of, etc., June 6, 1230, 1237.
Delays, May 14, 117.
Demurrage on hired Transports, June 7, 1320.
Volunteers
Colours for Corps who supplied Contingents for South African War, proposed, May 21, 765.
Officers;Retirement Regulations. May 24, 1114.
Yeomanry, Imperial;Reorganisation
Mounted Infantry, Training as;Equipment, May 24, 1111.
West Somersetshire Yeomanry;Training at Taunton, Revocation of Order, etc., May 16, 244.
Brookfield, Col. A. M. [Sussex, Rye]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 349.
Yeomanry, Imperial;Pay Claims of returned Yeomen from the Front, June 10, 1460.
Brown, Mr. M.
Director General of Customs at Korea, see Korea.
Brunner, Sir J. [Cheshire, Northwich]
Billinghay Infant School, Lincolnshire;Excessive Caning, May 20, 594.
Brussels
Industrial Property;Papers and Correspondence relative to Meeting at Brussels Presented, May 14, 10.
Bryce, Rt. Hon. J. [Aberdeen, S.]
Aberdeen Post Office, Delay in building, June 7, 1357.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 705.
South African War;Zulu Cattle Raiding, etc., May 23, 1022, 1032, 1033.
Budget
Accounts;Complaints as to confusion and the Inaccurate manner in which Accounts are presented to the House
Debate on the Finance Bill, May 20, 615.
Finance Bill, see that title.
Fowler's Sir H., Amendment to Finance Bill, May 20, 615;Sir M. H. Beach's Reply, 633.
Supplementary Statement with regard to Duties on Molasses and Glucose (Sir M. H. Beach), June 10, 1475.
Buenos Ayres
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Building Bye-laws
Rural and Urban Districts;Revision of Bye-laws by Local Government Board
Q. Mr. Bond; A. Mr. Long, May 14, 52.
Bull, Mr. W. J. [Hammersmith]
Local Records, Preservation of;Report of Treasury Committee, etc., May 20, 608.
Bullets
Mark IV. Ammunition Reserve, Amount sent out to South Africa, Withdrawal of Bullet, etc.
Os. Mr. Norman, May 23, 1015; Mr. Brodrick, 1030.
Burgess Hill Water Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
2R. * June 10, 1437.
Burgh Police and Public Health (Scotland) Bill
c. 1R. * May 17, 462.
Burgh Sewerage, Drainage and Water Supply (Scotland) Bill
c. 1R. * May 24, 1133.
Burial Grounds (Exemption from Rates) Bill
Petitions, May 16, 234.
Burma
Goktiek Viaduct, Erection by American firm;Quality of Work, Rivet testing, etc.
O. Sir A. Hickman, May 23, 1026.
Railways;American Locomotives, Defects of, see India;Railways.
Rubber-producing Trees, Developing Cultivation of;Government Measures
Q. Mr. Sharpe; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 17, 444.
Burns, Mr. J. [Battersea]
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1383; June 10, 1569.
Privy Council Registrar, Duties and Salary, etc., May 17, 479.
Burton, Lord
South Eastern and London, Chatham, and Dover Railways Bill, 3R., May 14, 8.
Burton-upon-Trent Corporation Bill
c. Con. * May 14, 37.
3R. * May 20, 573.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Bury Corporation Bill
c. Report, * May 20, 574.
Con. * June 6, 1209.
3R. * June 10, 1450.
Bury Corporation Tramways Bill
l. Report*, May 20, 534.
Bushey Park
Refreshment Kiosk proposed
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. Douglas, May 20, 599.
Business of the House
Army Reform and Reorganisation Discussion, Extending over another day proposed
Q. Sir J. Dickson-Poynder; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 15, 232.
Course of Business;Mr. Balfour's Replies to Questions, May 14, 65; May 16, 276; May 17, 461; May 20, 611; May 21, 784; May 24, 1132; June 6, 1218; June 7, 1334, 1435; June 10, 1474.
Distribution of Parliamentary Time
Debate on Duration of Speeches in Parliament, May 14, 127.
Finance Business, see titles Supply, Army Estimates, etc.
Friday Sittings;Adjournment of the House after Supply had been disposed of, Irish Members' Protest
Os. Mr. T. M. Healy, Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 532.
Statement and Debate on Motion for Whitsuntide Recess (Mr. A. J. Balfour), May 23, 989.
Butcher, Mr. J. G. [York]
Irvine, Dr. H. W., Appointment of, as Inspector of Schools at Birmingham, May 23, 1045.
Butter
Adulteration
Milk charged with Boracic Acid, Forcing into Butter, by means of Spiral Machine, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 17, 452; Qs. Mr. O'Shaughnessy, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Hanbury, May 21, 774.
Standards of Quality, etc.;Fixing
Qs. Mr. Archdale, Mr. O'Mara, Mr. Kearley; As. Mr. Han-bury, May 16, 256; Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 17, 452.
Committee, Appointment of
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 21, 775; Q. Mr. Strachey; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 7, 1326.
Irish Butter and Fraudulent Substitutes;Butter sold in Pyramid Boxes, etc.
Qs. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; As. Mr. Hanbury, Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 60.
Buxton, Mr. Sidney [Tower Hamlets, Poplar]
Zulu Cattle Raids under British Authority, alleged, May 23, 952.
C
Cabinet Committee of Defence
Coaling Stations, Garrisoning with Marines
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 244.
Cable Communication
China;Chefoo-Wei-hai-Wei Cable, Construction of, Asking for Public Tender, etc.
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 449.
German Emden-Ireland Cable;Question of Transfer of Landing Place from Valentia to Waterville
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 445.
Cadet Corps
Commanders;Honorary Bank and Volunteer Decoration, etc.
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1114.
Cadwallader Edward's Estate
Sale to Tenants, Delay in Effecting;Bill for obviating delays, etc.
Qs. Mr. Ffrench; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Caine, Mr. W. S. [Cornwall, Camborne]
Allotments of Soldiers;Non-payments to Wives, May 20, 581.
India
Central Provinces;New Bishopric proposed, etc., May 16, 247.
North-West Frontier;Afghan Tribal Feuds, Attack on South Waziri Militia, etc., May 23, 959.
Caldwell, Mr. J. [Lanark, Mid]
Ardrossan Harbour Order Confirmation Bill, Con., May 15, 170.
Census;Scottish Enumerators, Delay in Payment, May 20, 598.
Fee Grants in State-aided Schools in 1900 and 1901, etc., May 16, 260.
Income Tax Collection in Scotland in January, Later Collection in England, June 7, 1349.
Larceny Bill, 2R., June 10, 1541, 1547.
Caledonian Railway Bill
c. 3R. * May 16, 233.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
Cambrian Railways Bill
c. Report*, May 17, 437.
Con. * May 24, 1103.
3R. * June 7, 1311.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1438.
Cambridge
Forestry Lectures, number of Students attending
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 14, 53.
Cambridge University
South African War;Number Volunteering for Active Service, Commissions offered to members at home
Q. Mr. Moore; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1108.
Campbell-Bannerman, Rt. Hon Sir H. [Stirling Burghs]
Army Estimates, Parliamentary Control;Ordnance Factories Vote, June 6, 1283.
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 291, 296.
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, May 23, 1000.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 641; May 21, 830, 839.
South African War;Information with reference to the Situation in South Africa, May 23, 1028.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposals, June 10, 1483.
Camperdown, Earl of
Habitual Drunkards' Bill, Com., May 17, 409, 414.
Licensing Boards' Bill, 2R., May 14, 11, 18.
Private Bill Procedure, Scotland, Act;Opposition in the House of Lords, interval between first and third Beading's;Ardrossan Harbour Confirmation Bill, 3R., May 20, 538.
Canada
Live Cattle Trade with England, Embargo on;Memorandum of Canadian Department of Agriculture
Qs. Sir J. Leng, Capt, Sinclair; As. Mr. Hanbury, May 20, 592.
Reciprocity Treaty with United States
O. Mr. G. Parker, May 20, 703.
South African War;Number of Troops sent to South Africa in proportion to population
O. Mr. G. Parker, May 20, 702.
Steamship Service;Subsidised Service between Canadian and French Ports
Q. Mr. J. Lowther; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 20, 588.
Canary Islands
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Canterbury, Archbishop of
Betting;Inquiry, Motion for Select Committee, May 20, 551.
Cape Colony
Cape Town, Uitlander Refugees' Committee Protest against detention of Refugees in, etc.
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 16, 238.
Rebels, Trial of, see South African War.
Capital
Private Capital, Protection of;Petition for Legislation, June 10, 1452.
Cardiff Corporation Bill
l. 2R. * May 14, 3.
Cardigan, County
Secondary and Technical Education;Minute Sanctioning Subjects to be taught under Clause 8 of Technical Instruction Act, May 21, 725, 760.
Carew, Mr. J. L. [Meath, S.]
Ballivor Petty Sessions;Hedgecutting Prosecutions, Dismissal of Summonses, May 17, 455.
Income Tax Abatements;Loss to the Exchequer, etc., May 16, 249.
Carrington, Maj.-Gen. Sir F.
South African War;Appointment to Command, Selection by War Office
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 242.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir E. H.;Solicitor-General [Dublin University]
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com. May 24, 1146, 1153.
Cartridge Cases
Allowance for Empty Cases returned;Suffolk Rifle Association
Q. Mr. F. W. Wilson; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 246.
Cartridges
Reserve of Small Arm Ammunition
Os. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 16, 383; Mr. Norman, May 23, 1012; Maj. Rasch, 1020; Mr. Brodrick, 1029; Capt. Norton. June 6, 1281.
"Startling and Extraordinary Revelation," 3,300 Cartridges
Os. Mr. Norman, May 23, 1012; Maj. Rasch, 1019; Mr. Brodrick, 1029.
Weekly Output by Woolwich Factory, Messrs. Kynoch, etc.
Qs. Mr. Norman, Maj. Rasch; As. Mr. Brodrick, May 20, 580.
Cartwright, Mr.
Prosecution for Libel, see "South African News."
Catterall
Croydon Brawling Case;Sending Bill to Grand Jury
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 21, 772.
Cattle and Live Stock
Africa, South;Number and Locality of Government Stock Farms, Number of Cattle, etc.
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1111.
Canadian Cattle, Exclusion from British Ports;Memorandum from Canadian Department of Agriculture
Qs. Sir J. Leng, Capt. Sinclair; As. Mr. Hanbury, May 20, 592.
Molasses for Cattle Feeding, see Sugar Duty.
Tuberculosis, see that title.
Cautley, Mr. H. S. [Leeds, E.]
Leeds, Engineer Volunteers;Furlough with Month's Pay for Men having served less than one year, etc., May 16, 243.
Cava, Island of,
Charges borne by Parish of Orphir in respect of Island, etc.
Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 17, 453.
Cavan
Fair Rent Appeals, Number pending, etc. Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 980.
Finlay's Estate, see that title.
Lunatic Asylum, Expenditure on;Inquiry Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 266.
Old Prison, Handing over to Military Authorities
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 778.
Cayzer, Sir C. W. [Barrow-in-Furness]
Regimental Titles;Naming Regiments after Colonies which had sent Troops to South Africa, May 20, 582.
Cecil, Lord Hugh [Greenwich]
Ascension Day;Sittings of Committees in the House, May 15, 174.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 165.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 632.
Cecil Manuscripts
Publication of by the Historical Manuscripts Commission
Os. Mr. W. Redmond, May 17, 531; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 531.
Census
Enumerators, Payment of
Cost in England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland respectively, etc.
Qs. Mr. Schwann, Mr. Mooney; As. Mr. W. Long, Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16 257.
Delay in Payment
Q. Mr. Caldwell; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 20, 598.
Ireland, see that title.
Liverpool Population, see Liverpool.
London, Administrative County of;Classifying with large Towns
Q. Mr. H. Hobhouse; A. Mr. Long, May 23, 964.
Returns, England and Wales;Report Presented May 23, 950; June 10, 1441.
Scotland, see that title.
Central Telegraph Office
see Telegraph Service.
Chairman of Committees
Rt. Hon. J. W. Lowther.
Chamberlain, Mr. Austen;Financial Secretary to the Treasury [Worcestershire, E.]
Business of the House;Friday Sittings, Adjournment of the House after Supply had been disposed of, Irish Members' Protest, May 17, 532.
Cable Communication
China;Chefoo-Wei-hai-wei Cable, Construction of;asking for Public Tender, etc., May 17, 449.
German Emden-Ireland Cable, Question of transfer of landing place from Valentia to Waterville, May 17, 445.
Census Enumerators;Cost in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales respectively, May 16, 258.
Civil Service
Female Typists;Nomination of Candidates, May 23, 976.
Upper Division Staff Clerk, Defini-Hon of, May 16, 264.
Denominational Schools, Subscriptions to;Return, Publication of, June 6, 1215.
Distillation;Rewards paid for the seizure of Illicit Stills, June 7, 1342, 1346; June 10, 1556, 1557.
Express Letter Delivery;Prohibitive Fee of 3d., June 7, 1364.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 23, 1089.
Government Printing Contracts;Fair Wage Regulation, etc., May 16, 262.
Income Tax;Repayments, Simplifying forms, Legal Assistance for Persons appearing before the Special Commissioners, Overworked Staff, Closer Collection of Income Tax in Scotland, etc., June 7, 1340, 1351, 1353.
Inland Revenue Department;Estate Duty Office Staff;"Redundant" Clerks and Messengers, etc., June 7, 1349.
Irish Questions
Ancient Laws of Ireland;Publication of remaining Volumes, Date of, etc., May 14, 62.
Baltimore Mail Service from Skib-bereen;Delay in Delivery of Letters, May 21, 783.
Belfast Surveyor of Taxes Office, Chief Clerk in;Placing on Permanent Staff of Civil Service, proposed, May 24, 1121.
Cork Post Office
Exchange of Duties in the Telegraph Office, May 20, 607.
Provincial Clerks in Charge, May 17, 460.
Dublin
Inns Quay Post Office, Closing of, etc., May 20, 607.
Post Office Telephone Operators;Female Operators, Proposed Increase of Salary, May 23, 984.
Registry of Deeds Office;Delivery of Telegrams to Searchers, May 21, 784.
Firies Postal Deliveries, June 7, 1331.
Girl Clerks in Post Office;Training in London, etc., May 23, 985.
Inniskeen, Sunday Post to and from, May 14, 62.
Kilrush Postmastership;Filling vacant Appointment, May 17, 459.
Land Judges' Court;Receivers' Department, Payment of Staff Expenses, etc., May 16, 275.
Limerick Rural Postman's Grievances, June 10, 1472.
Longford Postal Service, Improvements, May 14, 63.
Monaghan Postal Arrangements;Tri-weekly Delivery of Letters at Swan's Cross, May 24, 1122.
Nenagh Stamp Distributor;Delay in Appointment, May 23, 985.
Newtown District, Queen's Co.;Delay in Delivery of Letters, May 23, 986.
Post Office Savings Bank Accounts, Transferring to Dublin proposed, May 23, 987.
Law Courts of Justice Clerks;Compulsory Retirement, May 16, 263.
Local Taxation;Aid from Imperial Sources in 1900, etc., May 17, 453.
Lord President of the Council
Private Secretary, Salary, Duties, etc., May 17, 473.
Salary, Duties, etc., Sinecure Office, alleged, May 17, 464.
Mint;Salaries of Assayer and Chemist;Loss on Coin withdrawn from Circulation;Loss or Profit upon working of Mint, etc., May 17, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510.
Mount Pleasant Sorting Office;Medical Officer, Appointment proposed, etc., June 6, 1216.
Museums, Sunday Opening of;Engagement of Officials, May 23, 975.
National Debt Office;Comptroller-General;Number of Clerks, Payments to the Banks of England and Ireland as Agents, etc. May 17, 517.
P. and O. Steamers, Lascars on;Action by the Board of Trade against the Company, June 7, 1409, 1418, 1420.
Post Office Employees
Granting Day's Leave on May 24, May 23, 973.
Grievances, Committee of Inquiry, proposed, etc., June 7, 1377; June 10, 1573.
Nottingham Postmen's Walks;Advertising Vacancies, etc., May 20, 597.
Pensions held by Officials;Regulations, May 20, 596.
Postal Clerks' Deputation to Postmaster-General, May 23, 974.
Post Office Reforms;Mr. Henniker-Heaton's proposals, etc., June 10, 1575.
Postmaster-General sitting in the House of Lords, unsatisfactory Representation in the House of Commons, June 10, 1575.
Postmasterships, Promotions to;Powers of Superiors, May 23, 972.
Postmasterships and Sub-Postmasterships;Number of Appointments, Selection of Candidates, etc., May 16, 264.
Postage Stamps, Design for new Issue entrusted to Austrian Artist, June 6, 1216.
Privy Council Registrar, Duties and Salary, etc., May 17, 478, 480.
Records, Circulation of Calendars;Separate Record Commission proposed for Ireland, etc., May 17, 526, 527.
Scotch Questions
Highlands and Islands of Scotland, Postal Facilities, Mails to Stornoway, etc., June 7, 1391, 1404.
Kyle and Inverness, Improved Mail Train Service;Rearrangement of Mail Steamer Service, May 14, 55.
Ross-shire;Additional Postal Facilities, etc., June 6, 1217.
Skye Mail Service;Proposed Steamer Service between Mallaig and West Coast of Skye, June 10, 1467.
Stornoway Mail Steamer Service vi&#x00E2; Mallaig;Result of Experiment, June 7, 1328.
Soldiers;Employment of Discharged Soldiers in preference to Civilians, May 17, 518, 519, 520.
Stamps;Designs for new stamps, Entrusting to Austrian Artist, May 23, 974, 975.
Sunday Labour in the Post-Office, June 7, 1364.
Supply;Form of presenting Estimates;Vote for the Mint, May 17, 505, 507.
Telegrams;Misdirected Telegrams, Postmasters giving Information respecting, Case at Grosmont, May 21, 777.
Telegraph Service
Central Telegraph Office;Meal Reliefs, May 23, 974.
Punishment for Errors, etc., May 20, 598.
Telephone Service;London Post Office System, Date of Completion, etc., May 16, 263.
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J.Secretary of State for the Colonies [Birmingham, W.]
Africa, South;Introduction of Chinese Labour, etc., May 14, 46.
Canada;Steamship Service, Subsidised Service between French and Canadian Ports, May 20, 589.
Durban, Plague at;St. Helena, Prohibition of landing Persons and Stores in, from Durban, etc., May 16, 239.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 23, 1076.
Gold Coast;Labour Ordinance of 1893, Amendments proposed, June 10, 1464.
Irvine, Dr. H. W., Appointment of, as Inspector of Schools at Birmingham, May 23, 1039, 1041, 1043.
Jameson Raid
Boer Claims for Damages, etc., May 14, 44.
Indemnity;British South Africa Company, H. M. Government demanding payment of Indemnity, May 21, 761.
Malta, Language Question
Correspondence relating to, May 20, 589.
Meeting in Malta on May 5;Report, etc., May 24, 1116.
Patagonia, Welshmen in;Report of Chaplain of H. M. S. "Flora," May 24, 1116.
Queensland, Asiatic Labour in;Bill Prohibiting, Royal Sanction efused, June 7, 1322.
South African Constabulary, Character, Evidence required, June 10, 1456.
"South African News," Prosecution of Editor for Libel;Mitigation of Sentence, Proposed, May 14, 44
South African War.
Farm Burning;Rebuilding Farms, proposed, May 17, 441.
Kimberley, Siege of;Claims of De Beers Company, May 21, 761.
Peace Negotiations with General Botha, May 16, 238; June 7, 1319.
Rebels, Trials of;Exclusive of Reporters of "South African News," May 24, 1112.
Transvaal Uitlanders, Number Serving in the Field, May 24, 1112.
Transvaal
British Indian Subjects.
Invalidating Boer Regulations, May 24 1113.
Return to the Transvaal, May 14, 45.
Concessions Commission;Report May 17, 441; June 7, 1319.
Gold Mines Taxation;Contribution towards Cost of the War, etc., May 24, 1112.
Gold Production 1897&#x2013;99, May 23, 956.
Uitlander Refugees Committee;Protest against detention of Refugees in Cape Town, etc., May 16, 238.
Trinidad, Education in;Closing Government Schools, etc., May 17, 445.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
Lord James of Hereford.
Chancellor of the Exchequer
Rt. Hon. Sir M. Hicks-Beach.
Channing, Mr. F. A. (Northamptonshire, E.]
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill, 2R., May 17, 425.
Malta;Language Question, meeting in Malta on May 5;Report, etc., May 24, 1116.
South African War
Hoopstad, Siege of, alleged;Evacuation, etc., May 16, 241.
Refuge Camps, Condition of, Mortality among Children, etc., May 24, 1191.
Chaplains
Army and Navy, see those titles
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. H. [Lincolnshire, Sleaford]
Beer Bill;Referring to Grand Committee, Memorial of April 23, May 20, 610; May 24, 1130.
Derby Day;Adjournment of the House;"Discreditable" Practice of Adjourning for Derby Day, May 23, 1003.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 814.
Housing of the Working Classes;Tramways, Government Pledges, etc., May 20, 609.
Pure Beer Movement;Government Intentions, June 6, 1219.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1482.
Charitable Loans (Ireland) Act, 1900
Recovery of Debt;Method of making out Accounts, Dromore Magistrate's instructions to Clerk, etc.
Qs. Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Atkinson, May 23, 983; May 24, 1126.
Charities and Charity Commissioners
Cowley Leper Hospital, St. Katharine's Hospital, etc., see those titles.
Durham County;Further Return Presented, May 23, 950.
Endowed School Work;Expenditure, etc, Os. Mr. Holland, Mr. G. Boscawen, May 17, 500, 501.
Inquiries;Compiling List of Charities;Inquiry into South Wiltshire Charities
Q. Mr. Lawrence; A. Mr. Boscawen, June 10, 1467.
Lancaster, County of;Further Return Presented, May 15, 173.
Landed Property, Sale of
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 498.
Number of Sales in 1900;Return proposed, etc.
Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. G Boscawen, May 23, 971.
London;Further Return Presented, May 23, 950.
Salaries and Expenses of Commission, Vote for, May 17, 483.
Trust Funds, Investment of
Os. Mr. Whitley, May 17, 503; Mr. Boscawen, 504.
Trustees;Disqualification of Nonconformists
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 483.
Cheque Bank
Liquidation;Claims, Delay in Settling Q. Mr. Cohen; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, June 7, 1326.
Chester, Bishop of
Took the Oath, May 20, 572.
Chester Corporation Tramways Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 398.
c. 1R. * May 20, 576.
Chesterfield Improvement Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 14, 2.
3R. * May 21, 722.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Chief Secretary for Ireland
Rt. Hon. G. Wyndham.
Children
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bills, see their titles.
China
Anglo-Russian Dispute in Tientsin, see sub-heading Tientsin.
British Trade in the Yang-tse Valley, see sub-heading Yang-tsze Valley;German Trade Developments.
British Troops, Withdrawal of
Os. Marquess of Lansdowne, May 21, 735; Visc. Cranborne 770.
British Tug-boat on the Peiho, German Troops firing on
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 729; Marquess of Lansdowne, 737.
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 21, 767.
Crew, Flogged in German Prison, alleged
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 21, 768, 771.
Cable Communication;Chefoo Wei-hai-wei Cable, Construction of, Public Tenders, etc.
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Ms. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 449.
Elliott and Blonde Islands Expedition, Russian Objections
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 729; Marquess of Lansdowne, 738.
German Trade, see sub-heading Yang-tsze.
German Troops Firing on British Boat, see sub-heading British Tug-boat.
Hong Kong, see that title
Indemnities
Amount of Indemnity, Method of Payment, etc.
O. Visc. Cranborne, May 21, 768.
Basis of Payment, etc.
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 727; Marquess of Lansdowne, 731.
Exceeding Expenses Incurred, etc.
Q. Mr. Harwood; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 608.
Manchuria;Russian Occupation, etc.
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 729; Marquess of Lansdowne, 738.
Marines;Royal Marine Light Infantry, Date of Promotions
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 14, 51.
Niuchwang, Russian Occupation
O. Earl Spencer, May 21, 729.
Northern Railways;Russia and the Northern Railways
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 729; Marquess of Lansdowne, 737.
Peking Legations, Defence and Relief of;War Honours
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 23, 959.
Punishment of Chinese Officials;Modes of Punishment, etc.
O. Marquess of Lansdowne, May 21, 730.
O. Visc. Cranhorne, May 21, 770.
Punitive Expeditions, Necessity for
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 728; Marquess of Landowne, 737.
Reforms;Fiscal Reforms, Increase in Import Tariff
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Visc Cranborne, May 14, 52.
Situation in
Debate (Lords), May 21, 726;(for Details of Debate, see their subheadings, such as Indemnities, British Tug Boat, etc.)
Q. Mr. J. Walton; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 21, 768.
Tientsin
Affray between French and British Troops
Qs. Mr. H. Roberts, Mr. C. Hobhouse; As. Lord G. Hamilton, June 10, 1463.
Anglo-Russian Dispute
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 728; Marquess of Lansdowne, 735; Visc. Cranborne, 771.
Settlement as to Ownership of Land, etc.
Qs. Mr. H. Roberts, Sir C. Dilke; As. Visc. Cranborne, May 17, 448.
German Troops firing on British Tug-Boat, see sub-heading British Boat on the Peiho.
Trade Reports Presented, May 17, 400; June 10, 1441.
Yang-tsze Provinces
Disturbances in;Abandonment of Examinations, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 17, 448.
Viceroys, Attitude of
Os. Earl Spencer, May 21, 728; Marquess of Lansdowne, 738.
Yang-tsze Valley;German Trade Developments, Co-operation of Hamburg-American Steamship Company with North German-Lloyd Company
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 10, 1462.
China Manufacture
Lead Poisoning, see that title.
Chinese Labour
Introduction of, into South Africa, see Africa, South.
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 126.
Church
Brawling in;Croydon case, see Croydon.
Disestablishment of the Church in Wales Motion (Mr. O. Williams), May 21, 879.
Church Discipline
Petition, June 7, 1312.
Church Discipline Bill
Affording Special Facilities for Debate proposed
Q. Mr. C. M'Arthur; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 610.
References to in Debate on the Whitsuntide Adjournment Motion, May 23, 990, 994, 996, 998.
Church House
Duration of Speeches
O. Maj. Rasch, May 14, 132.
Churchill, Lord R.
National Expenditure, Economy Agitation of 1886
Mistaken Economy
O. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 308.
"Vulnerable and scattered Character of the Empire and the Universality of our Commerce"
Os. Lord Stanley, May 14, 95, 107; Sir J. Colomb, 106.
Churchill, Mr. Winston [Oldham]
Imperialism;"Hereditary desire to run Imperialism on the cheap"
O. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 310.
Cider
Normandy Cider, Production of;Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
City and South London Railway Bill
c. 2R. * May 20, 573.
City of London Police
Commissioner of the Police acting independently of the Home Office
Q. Col. Lockwood; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 10, 1464.
Civil List
Pensions, Persons in Receipt of, on Civil List of Her late Majesty;Return Ordered May 16, 237, Presented May 20, 578.
Civil List Bill
c. 2R. * May 24, 1134.
Com., June 10, 1490.
Civil List Bill
Debate in Committee (Commons), June 10, 1490.
Army Commissions held by the King, 1501, 1503.
Cornwall and York, Duke and Duchess of, 1513, 1514.
Crown Lands;Ownership by the Sovereign personally or as Head of the State, 1490, 1492, 1497.
Ecclesiastical Officers and Allowances, 1519, 1520.
Expenditure of other Countries;Comparison with Russia, Italy, United States, etc., 1500.
Pensions, Charging upon Consolidated Fund, 1525, 1527, 1528, 1529, 1531, 1532, 1533.
Queen Alexandra, 1501, 1504, 1507, 1518.
Civil Service
Expenditure, Increase in
Os. Mr. G. Parker, May 20, 701; Mr. Lough, May 23, 1052.
Female Typists;Nomination of Candidates, Memorandum of Sept, 14
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 975.
Law Courts Clerks, see Law Courts.
Superannuation;Appointments without Certificates, Treasury Minutes Presented, June 6, 1213.
Upper Division Staff Clerk, Definition of Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 264.
Civil Service Estimates
see Supply.
Clancy, Mr. J. J. [Dublin., N.]
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1137, 1155.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 213.
Clanricarde Estate
Evictions;Cost incurred by Government Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 274.
Clergy
Convocation of the Clergy Bill, see that title.
Cleveland and Durham County Electric Power Bill
c. 3R. * May 16, 233.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
Clubs
Licensing and Supervision;Petitions, May 21, 758.
Registration of Clubs Bill, see that title.
Clyde Valley Electrical Power Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
Con.* May 24, 1103.
3R. * June 7, 1311.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1438.
Coal
Export Duty, One Shilling per ton;Budget Proposal
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 628; May 21, 787; May 23, 1055.
Mining Association of Great Britain;Resolution
Qs. Sir J. Joicey, Mr. J. Lowther; As. Sir M. H. Beach, May 26, 590.
Quality of Coal;Unequal Incidence of Duty
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 252.
Remission;Coal shipped since April 19 under Contracts prior to that date
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 4, 1117.
Mining Statistics;Estimate of Number of Persons employed, Method of Calculating, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Mr. Long, May 23, 965.
Quantity and Value of Coal produced, Wages of Coal Miners, 1886&#x2013;1900, and Coalowners Profits, etc.;Return Ordered, May 15, 173; Presented, May 16, 236.
Coal Mines
Senghenydd Colliery Disaster
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 24, 1118; O. Mr. Ritchie, May 24, 1207.
Coal Mines (Employment) Bill
Petitions, May 14, 41; May 20, 576; June 6, 1210; June 7, 1312; June 10, 1451.
Coaling Stations
Garrisoning with Marines;Attitude of Defence Committee
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 244.
Cogan, Mr. D. J. [Wicklow, E.]
Kearon, T., Case of;Street Preaching at Arklow, Conviction for Assault, etc., May 24, 1125.
Wicklow Artillery Militia;Training at Cork, May 24, 1115.
Coghill, Mr. D. H. [Stoke-upon- Trent]
Privy Council Office, Salary of Registrar, etc., May 17, 477, 480.
Cohen, Mr. B. [Islington, E.]
Cheque Bank Liquidation;Delay in Settling Claims, June 7, 1326.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 669.
Transport Service to South Africa, June 6, 1234.
Colomb, Sir J. [Great Yarmouth]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals;Military Policy, Over Sea requirements of the Empire, May 14, 106.
Colonial Office
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. J. Chamberlain.
Parliamentary Secretary;Earl of Onslow.
Kitchener's, Lord, Correspondence with Q. Mr. Labouchere; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1317.
Colonies
Annual Report Presented, May 20, 540, 578.
Army, Imperial;Colonies participating in the Defence of the Empire, etc.
Inviting Colonies to raise Regular Corps
Q. Col. Legge; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 20, 583.
Regimental Titles, Naming Regiments after Colonies which had sent Troops to South Africa
Q. Sir C. Cayzer; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 582.
Yeomanry, Imperial;Scheme for Raising Force in Colonies
Os. Lord Stanley, May 14, 92; Mr. Freeman Thomas, 106; Col. Brookfield, May 16, 353.
Defence of the Colonies;Defence of British Trade, etc.
Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 646, 702; May 21, 801.
Medical Reports for 1898 and 1899 Presented, May 21, 724, 760.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, Rebate proposed
O. Mr. J. Lowther, May 23, 1072.
Colour Blindness
Sight Tests in the Mercantile Marine-Report Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
Colville, Mr. J. [Lanark, N. E.]
Post-Office Employees' Grievances, Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1380.
Colwyn Bay and Colwyn Urban District Gas Bill
l. Report, * May 20, 534.
Commercial Law
Codification proposed
Q. Mr. Mitchell; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 24, 1119.
Commons Regulation and Inclosure (Skip-worth) Provisional Order Bill
c. 2R. * May 15, 171.
Report, * May 23, 947.
3R. * May 24, 1104.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1440.
Companies (Certificates) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 65.
Compassionate Allowances
see Army.
Compensation for Damage to Crops, etc Bill
Petitions, May 20, 576.
Compton, Lord A. [Beds, Biggleswade]
Horses, Wastage of in South Africa;Superiority of English Horses, etc., June 6, 1257.
Congested Districts Board, Ireland
Kerry, Representative for;Moving Bog, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 7, 1329.
Purchase of Estates;Seaweed Rights Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wvndham, May 17, 456.
Congested Districts Board, Scotland
Purchase of Land in Congested Districts Qs. Mr. Weir; As. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 24, 1120; June 7, 1327.
Secretary for Scotland visiting Western Islands, proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 970.
Uist, South;Crofters threatening to take possession of Farm of Bornish, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 970.
Connaught
Congestion in;Scheduling as Congested District proposed
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 7, 1330.
Conscription
see Army.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
Herbert Estate Conference;Attendance of Police from Beaufort
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469.
Kenmare Constabulary and Harvest Work;Assisting District Inspector
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 777.
Killarney House;Police Protection, Cost, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1468.
Newport, Co. Mayo;Number of Police, Religion, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1471.
Pensions;Number of Officers and Head Constables receiving Pensions, etc.
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 457.
Re-armament, Pay and Allowances, etc.
Qs. Mr. Flynn, Mr. S. MacNeill; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 267.
Issue of Lee-Metford Rifles
Qs. Mr. S. MacNeill, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 58.
Retirement Regulations, Recruiting, &amp;c.
Qs. Mr. J. P. Farrell, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 270.
Retirements on Pension;Powers of Inspector-General to compel Constables to retire
Qs. Mr. M'Dermott. Mr. Flavin; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 979.
Sheridan, Sergeant, Dismissal of;Case of Daniel McGoohan
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 59.
Stills;Rewards for seizures of Illicit Stills
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1339, 1342, 1343, 1345, 1346; June 10, 1555, 1556, 1557.
United Irish League Meetings;see names of Places.
Viceregal Commission;Names and positions of Members, etc.
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 271.
Wicklow, Co.;Case of Constable Freeman, Proposed Removal, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1124.
Constantinople
Post Offices, Attempt to abolish Foreign Post Offices, see Turkey;Postal Service.
Continuation Classes, Scotland
see Education;Scotch Questions.
Continuous Discharges, Seamen
see Seamen;Merchant Service.
Convict Prisons
Dietary, etc., Draft of Rules Presented May 21, 725, 760.
Convicts
Penal Servitude Acts;Conditional Licences Granted, May 20, 540.
Convocations of the Clergy Bill
l. 1R. * May 17, 400.
Cookery
Education Code of 1901, see Education;Code of 1901.
Cordite
Machinery for Manufacture of, Price of Cordite, etc.
Os. Mr. Lloyd-George, June 6, 1289; Mr. Brodrick, 1290.
Cork
Dairy Industry;Loans to Farmers proposed
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469.
Parliamentary By-Election;New Member Sworn for Mid Cork Division, May 23, 989.
Post Office
Exchange of Duties in the Telegraph Office
Q. Mr. J. F. X. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 20, 607.
New Building, Flans, etc.
Os. Mr. Flynn, June 7, 1393.
Provincial Clerks in Charge, Qualifications, etc.
Q. Mr. J. F. X. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 459.
Coroners' Inquests, Ireland
Medical Fees;Fee paid to Dr. Synnott
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 981.
Coroner's Inquests (Railway Fatalities) Bill
c. Bill withdrawn, June 6, 1306.
Corporal Punishment
Schools;Excessive Punishment in Infants' Schools at Billinghay
Q. Sir J. Brunner; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 20, 594.
Sentences inflicted, etc.;Address for Return, May 16, 237;Return Presented, June 7, 1313.
Cottage Gardening
Education Code of 1901, see Education;Code of 1901.
County Councils (Legislation) Bill
c. 1R. * May 17, 462.
County Courts
Wales;Welsh-speaking Witnesses, Observations of Judge Bishop, etc.
Q. Mr. Philipps; A. Sir R. Finlay, June 7, 1324.
County Courts (Ireland) Bill
l. Report, * May 21, 725.
Cowes Ferry Bill
l. 3R. * May 14, 3.
c. 1R. * May 17, 439.
2R. * June 6, 1209.
Cowley
Leper Hospital, Action of Charity Commissioners
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 499.
Cranborne, Visc.;Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs [Rochester]
China
British Trade in the Yang-tsze Valley;German Trade Developments, Cooperation between the Hamburg-American Steamship and North-German Lloyd Companies, June 10, 1463.
Fiscal Reform, Increase in Impost Tariff, May 14, 52.
Indemnities, Method of Payment, etc. May 21, 768.
Punishment of Chinese Officials, May, 21, 770.
Tientsin
Anglo-Russian Dispute, May 17, 449; May 21, 771.
British Boat on the Peiho fired on by Germans, May 21, 768, 770.
Yang-tsze Provinces, Disturbances in, May 17, 448.
Morea;Imports of British Goods, May 17, 448.
Newfoundland;Bond-Blaine Convention, Renewal of;Negotiations with United States, June 10, 1462.
Roumanian Ports;Quarantine Regulations, May 23, 960.
Turkey
Massacre of Christians by Kurds at Mosul, May 17, 446.
Postal Service;Turkish attempt to abolish Foreign Post Offices, May 16, 249; May 17, 447.
Uganda Railway;Col. Gracey's Report, etc., May 16, 248.
Crean, Mr. E. [Cork, S. E.]
Distillation;Seizures for Illicit Distillation in Ireland, June 10, 1557.
Inspector of Irish Fisheries;Appointment, etc., May 16, 269.
Rural Auxiliary Postmen and Labourers' Cottages, May 23, 981.
South African War;Cost of bringing Soldiers home, etc., June 7, 1434.
Cramer, Mr. W. R. [Shoreditch, Haggerston]
Charities;Disqualification of Nonconformists as Trustees, etc., May 17, 494.
St. Katherine's Hospital, Appropriation of Funds, May 17, 501, 503.
Crete
Affairs of;Correspondence Presented, May 22, 884.
Campaign Medal, Allowing Troops to wear
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 10, 1461.
Crimean War
National Debt after the War
References to, in Debate on the Finance Bill, May 20, 626, 651.
Cripps, Mr. C. A. [Lancashire, Stretford]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 144.
Crofters and Cottars, Scotland
Congested Districts Board, see that title.
Crombie, Mr. J. W. [Kincardineshire]
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, Invasion of Private Members' Rights, etc., May 23, 995.
Cromer Water Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 948.
Con. * June 10, 1450.
Crops
Compensation for Damage to Crops, etc., Bill, see that title.
Cross, Visc.
Habitual Drunkards Bill, Com., May 17, 402, 403.
Queen Anne's Bounty Board, Constitution of, etc.;Inquiry, Reappointment of Joint Committee, May 14, 36.
Crossley, Sir S. [Halifax]
Army;Private Soldiers' Pay, Details showing how the amount of Thirty Shillings is arrived at, May 16, 245.
House of Commons Lobbies and Corridors;Improved Ventilation, May 16, 258.
South African War;Boer Horses, Requisitioning, June 6, 1267.
Crown Appointments
Ireland;Roman Catholics holding, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 268.
Crown Lands
Civil List Bill, see that title.
Croydon
Brawling Case;Sending Bill to Grand Jury
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 21, 772.
Cruisers
see Navy.
Cullinan, Mr. J. [Tipperary, S.]
Industrial Schools;Application for Committal of C. Miller to Strabane Industrial School, May 23, 978.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 224.
Currency
Loss on Silver Coins Withdrawn from Circulation;References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 508, 509.
Cust. Mr. H. J. C. [Southwark, Bermondsey]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 23, 1082.
Customs Duties
Revenue derived from;Inaccuracies in Budget Statement alleged;Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 616.
Cycles
Railway Companies;London and North Western Railway Company. Compensation for Damage Refused
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 24, 1119.
D
Dairy Industry
Ireland;Loans to Farmers to purchase Separators, proposed
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469.
Daly, Mr. J. [Monaghan, S.]
Cavan and Monaghan Lunatic Asylum, Expenditure on;Inquiry, May 16, 266.
Farmers, Loans to, proposed, May 17, 454.
Inniskeen, Sunday Post to and from, May 14, 62.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 908, 915.
National Debt Office;Comptroller-General's Salary, Salary of Broker, etc., May 17, 516.
Postmasterships, Promotions to;Powers of Supervisors, May 23, 972.
Dangerous Trades
Lead Poisoning, see that title.
Dartmoor Prison
Military Convicts from South Africa;Number Punished for Sleeping on Duty
Q. Mr. Spear; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1316.
Dartmouth, Earl of
Rifle Range, Expenditure on, Allocation of Grant, etc., May 17, 421, 423.
Dartrey, Earl of
South Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railways Bill, 3R., May 14, 6.
Darwen
St. John's Culvert Schools Accounts;Including Salary of Organist alleged
Q. Mr. Gray; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 966.
Davies, Mr. A. [Carmarthen Boroughs]
Coal Duty;Inferior Coal, Unequal Incidence of Duty, May 16, 252.
Jameson Raid;Boer Claims for Damages' etc., May 14, 44.
South African War, Inquiry into, Conduct and Operations of the War, May 16, 237.
Davies, Mr. M. V. [Cardigan]
Explosives Acts, Breaches of;Inadequate Penalties, etc., May 16, 253.
Day Industrial Schools (Ireland) Bill
l. 1R. * June 10, 1446.
De Beers Company
Siege of Kimberley;Compensation Claims Q. Sir C. Furness; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 21, 761.
Dean, Seaman
Wounded on s. s. "Runic," etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 20, 591.
Death Certificates, Scotland
Medical Certificate of Death not a necessary Condition of Burial;Legislation
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 16, 259.
Death Duties
Officers' Estates
Amount derived from Estates of Officers who have died on Active Service
Q. The Master of Elibank; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 249.
Officers dying on Active Service, Proposed Rebate
Q. The Master of Elibank; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 23, 962.
Revenue derived from;Inaccuracies in Budget Statement alleged
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 616.
Declaration of Heads of States
Return
Delay in furnishing
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 988.
Return Presented, May 23, 950.
Defence of the Empire
Cabinet Committee of Defence, see that title.
Colonial Contributions
References to in Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 702, 703, 713; May 23, 1080.
Colonies;Imperial Yeomanry, Raising Force in Colonies
Os. Lord Stanley, May 14, 92; Mr. Freeman Thomas, 106.
Military Expenditure;"Our Frontier is not the Land," etc.
Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 620, 646, 702; May 21, 801.
Military Policy;Over Sea requirements of the Empire
Colomb, Sir J., on, May 14, 107.
References to in Debate on the Army Reorganisation proposals, May 14, 72, 96; May 16, 359, 369.
(see also Military requirements of the Empire.)
Deficiency Borrowings
Interest charged in 1900 and 1901;Including in Interest for South African War Expenditure
Qs. Mr. M'Crae, Mr. G. Bowles; As.
Sir M. H. Beach, May 20, 589.
Rate of Interest paid to Bank of England, 1899&#x2013;1901
Q. Mr. Lloyd; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 24,, 1116.
Delany, Mr. W. [Queen's Co., Ossory]
Industrial Schools, Ireland;Reduction in Number of Committals, Compensation to Managers, proposed, May 20, 604.
Demise of the Crown Bill
c. Com. May 24, 1133.
3R. June 10, 1537.
Demise of the Crown Bill
Debate in Committee (Commons), May 24, 1135.
Ministers of the Crown
Vacation of Office and Seat on reappointment, 1139, 1142, 1145, 1146, 1148, 1154.
Officers of the Crown within and without the King's Dominions, Creating Separate Rules for, 1136, 1137, 1140, 1141.
Penalties, 1151, 1154, 1158, 1161, 1162.
Retrospective Nature of the Bill, Objections to, 1139, 1146, 1149, 1150, 1155.
Denny, Col. J. M. [Kilmarnock Burghs]
Seamen, Continuous Discharges, etc., May 16, 255
Denominational Schools
see Education.
Deptford Victualling Yard
Rum Drawers;Wages
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 20, 587.
Derby Day
Adjournment of the House;Extending Adjournment for Whitsuntide Recess, "Discreditable Practice of Adjourning for Derby Day"
Os. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 990; Mr. Chaplin's Protest, 1003.
Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Electric Power Bill
c. Con. * May 15, 169.
3R. * May 20, 573.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Derry
see Londonderry.
Derwent Valley Water Board Bill
l. 2R. * May 17, 398.
Devolution
Policy of, see Private Business.
Devonport
Dockyard Police;Lodging Allowance, Additional pay, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1290, 1291, 1292, 1293, 1294, 1295.
Devonport Corporation (Gas) Bill
l. 2R. * May 20, 535.
Dewar, Mr. John [Inverness]
Armadale;Construction of Pier, May 14, 53.
Death Certificates, Scotland;Legislation, May 16, 259.
Kyle and Inverness, Improved Mail Train Service;Re-arrangement of Mail Steamer Service, May 14, 55.
Post Office Service in the Western Islands of Scotland, Defects of present System, etc., June 7, 1367.
Postal Deliveries in the remote parts of Scotland and Ireland, Improvement of, June 10, 1566.
Skye Mail Service;Proposed Steamer Service between Mallaig and West Coast of Skye, June 10, 1466.
Dewar, Mr. Thomas [Tower Hamlets, St. George's].
Bushey Park;Refreshment Kiosk proposed, May 20, 599.
Ice Creams, Sale of, in London Streets-Deaths from Ptomaine Poisoning, etc., May 20, 593.
Dickson, Mr. C. S.;Solicitor-General for Scotland [Glasgow, Bridgeton.]
Armadale, Construction of Pier, May 14, 53.
Education Department Report;Supplying to Educational Authorities in Scotland, May 14, 55.
Linlithgow Procurator Fiscal;Appointment of Mr. J. Main, May 14, 54.
Private Bill Procedure (Scotland);Communicating Proceedings to the House, May 14, 54.
Dickson-Poynder, Sir J. [Wilts, Chippenham]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 368, 384.
Extending; Debate over another day, May 15, 232.
Dilke, Rt. Hon. Sir C. [Gloucester, Forest of Dean]
China
Peking Legations, Defence and Relief of;Proposed War Medal, May 23, 959.
Tientsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute, May 17, 449.
Commander-in-Chief and Secretary of State for War, Difference of Opinion between, May 14, 92.
Government Printing Contracts;Fair Wage Regulation, etc., May 16, 261.
Indian Army Expenditure, Effect of additional pay to Soldiers, May 14, 99.
Lead Poisoning
Increase in Number of Serious Cases, etc., May 17, 450.
Potteries Arbitration;Home Office Control, June 7, 1323.
Mint;Artistic Work, Responsibility for Designs, etc., May 17, 508.
St. Katherine's Hospital Funds, May 17, 502.
Dillon, Mr. J. [Mayo, E.]
Army
Ordnance Factories;Salaries and Responsibility for Work, etc., June 6, 1284, 1286.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals;Over-Taxation of Ireland, etc., May 14, 78.
Berwickshire County Town Bill, 2R., June 10, 1547.
Charitable Loans (Ireland) Act, 1900;Method of making out Accounts, Magistrates' Instructions to Clerks, etc., May 23, 983; May 24, 1126.
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Re-armament, etc., May 14, 58.
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1135, 1139, 1155, 1156; 3R., June 10, 1537.
Distillations, Seizure of Illicit Stills in Ireland, June 7, 1345; June 10, 1555.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 627, 637; May 21, 807.
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers;Accommodation, etc., June 7, 1407, 1416, 1418.
Law Courts, Ireland;Regulations for Distribution of Business, May 23, 982; May 24, 1127.
Rifles;New Pattern Rifle, June 6, 1287.
Rules and Order of Debate;Discussing Subject embodied in Motion on the Paper on a Motion for the Adjournment of the House for Recess, May 23, 1012.
Soldiers;Ear-marking Positions in the Post Office, May 17, 521.
South African Constabulary, Character, Evidence required, June 10, 1456.
South African War
False Statements from the Front
Allowing Correspondents to go to the Front, June 10, 1456.
Vlakfontein Engagement, June 7, 1321.
Farm Burning
Cape Colony, Number burnt, May 24, 1109.
De Wet's, Gen., House, Destruction of, May 24, 1110.
Haartebeestefontein, Destruction of, May 16, 242.
Horses
Carelessness and Bad Management in South Africa, etc., June 7, 1431.
System of Purchase, etc., June 6, 1267.
Lindley Disaster;Imperial Yeomanry, 10th Battalion, Failure to Believe Col. Spragge's Force, June 10, 1458.
Peace;General Botha and Lord Kitchener's Negotiations, General Botha's Account, May 16, 238.
Refuge Camps
Cape Colony, May 24, 1108.
Condition of, Mortality among Children, etc., May 24, 1181, 1187.
Transport to South Africa, Cost of;Lack of Detail in Army Estimates, etc., June 6, 1221, 1235.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1480.
Dimsdale, Sir J. C. [London]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 127, 138.
Disestablishment
Church in Wales
Motion (Mr. O. Williams), May 21, 879.
Distillation of Spirits
Illicit Distillation, Seizures in the United Kingdom;Rewards to Royal Irish Constabulary for Seizures in Ireland, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1339, 1342, 1343, 1345, 1346; June 10, 1555, 1556, 1557.
Distribution of Parliamentary Time
Debate on Adjournment for Whitsuntide Recess Motion, May 23, 989.
Debate on Duration of Speeches in Parliament, May 14, 127.
Division Lobbies
Fan Ventilators
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. A. Douglas, June 10, 1467.
Dixon-Hartland, Sir F. [Middlesex, Uxbridge]
Civil List Bill, Com., June 10, 1499, 1501.
Dockyard Police
Metropolitan Police;Lodging Allowance, Increase of Pay, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1290, 1291, 1292, 1293, 1294, 1295.
Dogs
Ireland;Importation into England Regulations
Q. Col. J. M'Calmont; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 16, 275.
"Doles"
Agricultural Rating Act
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 644.
Donegal County
Crown Appointments, Legal and Judicial, Roman Catholics holding, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 268.
Donelan, Capt. A. J. C. [Cork, E.]
Achonry;Meeting, Police Interference, May 14, 57.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 897.
Doogan, Mr. P. C. [Tyrone, E.]
Trish Language, Teaching of, in Irish Schools, May 21, 848, 863.
Dorking Gas Bill
c. Con. * May 20, 573.
3R.* May 23, 945.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1438.
Doughty, Mr. G. [Great Grimaby]
Humber Commercial Railway and Dock Bill, Con., June 10, 1448.
Douglas, Henry Edward
Petition for Inquiry into Case, May 20, 576.
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers;First Commissioner of Works [Kent, St. Augustine's]
Bushey Park;Refreshment Kiosk proposed, May 20, 599.
House of Commons
Lobbies and Corridors;Improved Ventilation, May 16, 259; June 10, 1467.
Telegraph Department Accommodation, May 17, 531.
National Gallery;Precautions against Fire, May 17, 454.
Dover
School Accommodation, Insufficiency of Q. Mr. Gray; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 965.
Dover Corporation Bill
l. Report, * May 21, 722.
Dromore
Charitable Loans Act, see that title.
Drunkenness
Ireland;Arrests for, Number, etc.;Return Ordered, May 16, 236; June 6, 1213.
Dublin
Barracks Works, Employment of Boy Labour, Terms of Fair Wage Resolution, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1172.
Inns Quay Post Office, closing of;Inconvenience caused by, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 20, 606.
Marlborough Street College;Irish Language, Professors of, Marlborough Street College, disadvantages
Q. Mr. J. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 6, 1217.
Marlborough Street Storws;Bookbinders' Society's Complaint, etc.
Qs. Mr. Nannetti; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 273.
Metropolitan Police;Statistical Tables for 1900 Presented, May 22, 883; June 10, 1440.
Post Office
Telephone Operators;Female Operators, proposed Increase of Salary
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 984.
"Three Shift System" Grievance O. Mr. Nannetti, June 7, 1395.
Registry of Deeds Office;Delivery of Telegrams to Searchers
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 21, 783.
Dublin Corporation (Markets, etc.) Bill
c. Recommitted, May 17, 423.
Report. * May 17, 438.
Con. * May 23, 945.
3R. * June 6, 1209.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1438.
Dublin (Equalisation of Rates) Bill
c. Con. * May 17, 436.
3R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Dublin, St. James's Gate Brewery Tramways Bill
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
2R. * May 21, 722.
Duke, Mr. H. E. [Plymouth]
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1153.
Dunkirk
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament
Limiting to Twenty Minutes
Motion (Sir J. Dimsdale), May 14, 127.
Amendment (Mr. S. Smith), 163.
Agriculture, Central Chamber of, Speeches Limit, 132.
Church House Speeches Limit 132.
Dividing up of Business in Devolution, 147.
Enforcement of Rule;Mode of Procedure, 129, 143, 149, 160.
History of the Movement, 129, 137.
Irish Members' Speeches, 136 140, 160, 164.
London County Council Speeches Limit, 132.
Ministers' and Ex-Ministers' Speeches, 127, 133, 137, 145, 146, 149, 150, 157, 165.
Notable Instances of Long Speeches, 127.
Private Business;Time Limit, 146.
Queen Elizabeth's Order to the House of Commons to "Work more and speak less," 130.
Questions;Time Limit, 146.
Speeches which are made for the purpose of Obstruction, 151.
Supply;No member should be allowed to speak owice on an amendment, 146.
Trade Union Congress Speeches Limit, 132.
United Service Institute Members' Speeches Limit, 132.
Durban
St. Helena, Precautions against Plague;Prohibition of the Landing of Persons and Stores from Durban, etc.
Q. Mr. Bathurst; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 16, 238.
Durham
College of Science;Forestry Lectures, Number of Students attending
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 14, 53.
Durham, Bishop of
Took the Oath, May 21, 721.
Durham, County of
Inquiry into Charities;Further Return Presented, May 23, 950.
E
Eccles Corporation Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 949.
Edinburgh
Sasine Office, Registration System;Search Sheet, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 968.
Education
President;Duke of Devonshire.
Vice-President;Rt. Hon. Sir J. E. Gorst.
Board of Education
Architect, Duties of Consulting Architect;Granting Interview to Persons submitting Plans etc.
Q. Mr. S. Wilson; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 967.
Lord President's Department, Salaries, Duties, etc.
Debate in Cora, of Supply, May 17, 463.
Bradford, All Saints' School Accommodation;Recognition for 816 Children
Q. Mr. Wanklyn; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 967.
Code of 1901;Cookery and Cottage Gardening, Article 101, Lowering Age for Grants, proposed
Q. Mr. Morrell; A. Sir J. Gorst. May 20, 595.
Corporal Punishment;Excessive Punishment in Infants' School at Billing-hay
Q. Sir J. Brunner; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 20, 594.
Darwen, St. John's Culvert Schools Accounts;Including Salary of Organist, alleged
Q. Mr. Gray; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 966.
Dover School Accommodation, Insufficiency of
Q. Mr. Gray; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 965.
Elementary Education;Petition for Alteration of Law, June 10, 1451.
Expenditure, Increase in during Present Administration
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 622; May 21, 800.
General Reports for 1900 Presented, June 6, 1213.
Higher Grade and Evening Continuation Schools;Petitions, May 14, 41; May 16, 234; May 21, 758; May 22, 882; May 24, 1105; June 6, 1210; June 7, 1312; June 10, 1452.
Inspectors
Instructions to;Date of Issue to Members
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 7, 1323.
Irvine, Dr., see that sub-heading.
Women Sub-Inspectors, Promotion to Junior Inspectors;Extending Promotion to Men Sub-Inspectors, proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 20, 594.
Irish Questions
Books;Marlborough Street Stores, Bookbinders' Society Complaint, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti: A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 273.
Intermediate Education
Examinations;Publication of Programme and Rules for 1902
Q. Mr. W. Johnston; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 456.
Rules and programme of Examinations for 1902. Presented, June 10, 1443, 1453.
Rule appointing places at which examinations shall be held for 1901, Presented, May 24, 1105.
Irish Language, Teaching in Schools.
Motion (Mr. Doogan), May 21, 848.
National School Teachers, see that title
Technical Education, see Ireland.
University Education, see Ireland.
Irvine, Dr. H. W.;Appointment as Inspector of Schools for Birmingham
Os. Mr. M'Kenna, May 23, 1036; Mr. J. Chamberlain, 1038; Sir W. Foster, 1042; Sir J. Gorst, 1047.
Lord President of the Council, Salary, Duties, etc., Sinecure Office, alleged Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 463.
Pupil Teachers;Bolton Central Classes, Payment at Evening Rates
Q. Mr. Harwood; A. Sir J. Gorst, May 23, 967.
Scotch Questions
Board Schools;Prizes from School Funds, Providing Prizes for Denominational Schools, proposed
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 968.
Children Leaving School;Returns as to number reaching age of fourteen, Number obtaining Labour and Merit Certificates
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 16, 259.
Continuation Classes and the Powers of County Technical Instruction Committees
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 21, 776.
Education Department Report;Supplying to Educational Authorities in Scotland
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Dickson May 14, 55.
Fee Grants in State-aided Schools in 1900 and 1901, etc.
Qs. Mr. Caldwell; As. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 16, 260.
School Board Elections;Petition for Alteration of Law, May 20, 577.
Training Colleges;Reports and Papers for 1900 Presented, June 6, 1212.
Secondary and Technical Instruction
Cookery and Cottage Gardening and the Code of 1901, see sub-heading Code.
Counties and County Boroughs possessing, Constitution and date of recognition by Board of Education;Return Ordered, May 14, 43.
Foreign Competition;Competition with United States, etc.
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 653.
Minute sanctioning Subjects to be taught under Clause 8 of Technical Instruction Act for County of Cardigan, May 21, 725, 760.
Soldiers;Education of Soldiers for Civil Life
Debate (Lords), May 20, 556.
Teachers
Security of Tenure;Legislation, proposed
Qs. Capt. Norton, Mr. Taylor; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 988.
Superannuation in the Isle of Man;Rules Presented, June 6, 1214.
Voluntary Schools, see that title.
Warned Elementary Schools;Quartetly Returns Presented, May 23, 950.
Education Bill
Irish Technical Education, Effect of Repeal Clause on
Q. Mr. Loyd; A. Mr. G. Lawson, May 17, 460.
Education Board Provisional Order Confirmation (Acton) Bill
c. Com. and Rep. * May 20, 540.
3R., May 21, 723.
l. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Education Board Provisional Orders Confirmation (Barnes, etc), Bill
l. 2R. * May 20, 540.
Education Board Provisional Order Confirmation (London) Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 724.
Education (Continuation Schools) Bill
c. 1R. * May 21, 785.
Petition, June 10, 1451.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill
Petition, June 7, 1312.
Education of the Blind (Scotland) Bill
c. 1R. * May 21, 786.
Egypt
Railways;Belgian Engines, Consumption of Fuel, Repairs required, etc.
O. Sir A. Hickman, May 23, 1025.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 947.
Con. * May 24, 1104.
3R. * June 6, 1210.
l. 1R. June 10, 1440.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 3) Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 947.
3R. * May 24, 1104.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1440.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 4) Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 948.
Con. * May 24, 1104.
3R. * June 6, 1210.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1440.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 5) Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 948.
Con. * May 24, 1104.
3R. * June 6, 1210.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1440.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 10) Bill
l. 2R. * May 14, 10.
Elibank, Master of [Edinburgh Midlothian]
Death Duties
Amount of, on Estates of Officers who have died on Active Service since October, 1899, May 16, 249.
Officers Dying on Active Service, Proposed Rebate, May 23, 962.
Elland Gas Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 21, 722.
Elliot, Mr. A. R. D. [Durham]
Transvaal Concessions Commission;Report, June 7, 1319.
Elliot Islands
see China;Elliot and Blonde Islands.
Ellis, Mr. J. E. [Nottingham, Rushcliffe]
Census
Population of Ireland, May 20, 606.
Population of Scotland, May 20, 598.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 805.
South African War;Farm Burning, Discontinuance of, etc., June 10, 1458.
Supply Procedure;Reports of Supply; Stating on "Orders of the Day' particular Votes to be reported, May 14, 64.
Emigration and Immigration
Ireland;Emigration
References to in Debate on Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, May 22, 897, 908, 909, 924.
Statistical Tables relating to, with Board of Trade Report thereon;Return Ordered, May 14, 43;Presented, May 15, 173.
Emmott, Mr. A. [Oldham]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament;Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 133.
Employment of Discharged Soldiers
see Soldiers.
Endowed Schools
Charity Commissioners and Endowed School Work;Expenditure, etc.
Os. Mr. Holland, May 17, 500; Mr. Boscawen, 501.
Engineers
Army, see that title.
"England's Danger"
Steinberg's, Count, Book
Os. Mr. Dillon. May 14, 82; Sir J. Fergusson, May 16, 327.
Esmonde, Sir T. G. [Wexford, N.]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 148.
Records;Allocation of Calendars of Records, Irish grievance with reference to, in Publication of Irish State Papers, May 17, 523, 528.
Wexford County, Land Purchase in;Government Proposals, May 17, 458.
Establishment Licences
Collection, Method of, Complaints O. Mr. G. Bowles, June 7, 1345.
Estate Duty
see Death Duties.
Evans, Mr. S. T. [Glamorgan, Mid]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 667.
"South African News," Prosecution of Editor for Libel;Mitigation of Sentence, proposed, May 14, 44.
Evans, Sir F. H. [Maidstone]
Telegraphists, Granting Day's Leave on May 24th, May 23, 973.
Evictions, Ireland
Clanricarde Estate;Cost incurred by Government
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 274.
Notices;Return, Compulsory Land Purchase, proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 976.
Excise
Revenue derived from;Inaccuracies in Budget Statement, alleged
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 616.
Expansion of the Empire
Increase in National Expenditure
Os. Mr. Bryce, May 20, 716; Mr. Hanbury, May 21, 801.
Expenditure of the United Kingdom
see title Revenue and Expenditure, etc.
Explosives Acts
Breaches of;Inadequate Penalties, Amendment of Law, proposed
Q. Mr. V. Davies; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 16, 253.
F
Factory and Workshops Bill
Date of Second Reading;Representation from Members, etc.
Q. Sir F. Flannery; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 987.
Fair Wage Resolution
Dublin Barracks Works Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1172.
Government Printing Contracts in Scotland;Evading Fair Wage Clause
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 261.
Falkirk and District Tramways Order Confirmation Bill
c. Con. * and 3R. * May 15, 171.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
3R., June 10, 1439.
Farmers
Ireland;Granting Loans for Purchase of Machinery, etc., proposed
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 454; Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469.
Farquharson, Dr. R. [Aberdeenshire, W.]
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, Invasion of Private Members' Rights, May 23, 1005.
Continuation Classes;Managing Authorities and County Technical Instruction Committee, May 21, 776.
Hannah, Private;Compassionate Allowance, May 23, 955.
National Gallery;Precautions against Fire, May 17, 454.
Postage Stamps;Designs for New Stamps, Entrusting to Austrian Artist, May 23, 975; June 6, 1215.
Prisoners, Conveyance of;Death in Prison Van, May 17, 451.
South African War;Second Worcesters, Number of Sick in April, 1900, May 23, 951.
Farrell, Mr. J. P. [Longford, N.]
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Retirement Regulations, Recruiting, etc., May 16, 270.
Granard Union Workhouse;Employment of Trained Nurse, etc., May 20, 601.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 884, 907.
Lee, Ex-Private;Ill-treatment at Netley Hospital, alleged, May 14, 49.
Longford Co.
Labourers' Cottages in;Refusal of Applications, May 16, 272; May 20, 602.
Land Purchase;Application for Loans, etc., May 20, 601.
Postal Service, Improvements, May 14, 62.
Mint;Loss or Profit on Working of Mint, Form of presenting Estimates, etc., May 17, 509, 510.
National Debt Office;Number of Clerks, Comptroller General's Salary, Temporary Pensioner Messenger, etc., May 17, 513.
Faversham Water Bill
l. 3R. * May 14, 3.
c. 1R. * May 17, 439.
Fergusson, Rt. Hon. Sir J. [Manchester, N. E.]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 323.
Ffrench, Mr. P. [Wexford, S.]
Cadwallader Edward's, Estate, Delay in effecting Sale;Bill to obviate Delays, etc., May 16, 269.
Land Judge's Court;Salaries of Receivers, etc., Payment out of Estates in the Court, May 20, 605.
Wexford Co., Land Purchase in;Date of introducing Bill, May 17, 457.
Field, Mr. W. [Dublin, St. Patrick]
Great Southern and Western Railway Company, Ireland;Failure to provide through Rates, May 24, 1128.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 932, 933, 934.
Law Courts;Cash Balance, Proposed Loans to Irish Industries, etc., May 24, 1127.
Tuberculosis;Condemnation of Carcases, Statement of late Officer of Health for London, May 23, 964.
Finance
Deficiency Borrowings, Appropriations-in-Aid, see those titles; also title Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom, etc.
Finance Bill
c. 2R., May 20, 614; May 21, 786; May 23, 1051.
Petitions, May 17, 439.
Finlay, Sir R. B;Attorney-General [Inverness Burghs]
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1137, 1161.
Larceny Bill, 2R., June 10, 1544, 1547.
Lascars, Employment of, on P. and O. Steamers;Accommodation, etc., June 7, 1413.
Welsh County Courts, Welsh-speaking Witnesses in;Remarks of Judge Bishop, June 7, 1324.
Finlay's Estate
Sale of Land to Tenants;Delays, etc.
Qs. Mr. M'Govern; As. Mr Wyndham, May 23, 982; May 24, 1124.
Firearms
Regulating use of;Death of W. Dodd, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Dermott; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 20, 591.
Firies
Postal Deliveries;Reply to Inquiry
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 7, 1330.
Firms
Registration of Firms Bill, see that title.
First Commissioner of Works
Rt. Hon. A. Akers-Douglas.
First Lord of the Admiralty
Earl Selborne.
First Lord of the Treasury
Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour.
Fisheries (Ireland) Bill
c. 2R. * May 16, 396.
Fisheries
Ireland
Herrings, Destruction of, at Kinsale;Glut in Local Markets
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Inspection of Irish Fisheries;Appointment, etc.
Q. Mr. Crean; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Loans;Printing Amended Rules
Q. Mr. Power; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 779.
Fitzmaurice, Lord E. [Wilts, Cricklade]
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1140, 1145.
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill, 2R., May 17, 428.
Raising Questions in the House without Notice, which might embarrass the Government, May 24, 1188.
Salisbury Plain;Damage to Roads, Ratepayers' Grievance, etc., May 24, 1167.
South African War;Refuge Camps, Condition of, Mortality among Children, etc., May 24, 1189.
Flannery, Sir Fortescue [Yorkshire, Shipley]
Factory and Workshops Bill;Date of Second Reading, May 23, 987.
Irvine, Dr. H. W., Appointment of, as Inspector of Schools at Birmingham, May 23, 1038.
Flavin, Mr. M. J. [Kerry, N.]
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Retirements on Pension, Powers of Inspector-General to compel Constables to retire, May 23, 979.
Kerry Police and United Irish League, May 24, 1129.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 12, 219, 220.
South African War
Cost of bringing Soldiers home, June 7, 1434.
Farm Burning by British Troops, June 18, 1459
Rebuilding Farms, proposed, May 17, 440.
Peace Negotiations with Gen. Botha, June 7, 1319.
Flogging
see Corporal Punishment.
Flower, Mr. E. F. S. [Bradford, W.]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 23, 1057.
Flynn, Mr. J. C. [Cork, N.]
Addis, Private J., Death of;Grant for Mother, May 21, 764.
Agrarian Outrages;Return, Number of Threatening Notices, May 21, 781.
Berwickshire County Town Bill, 2R., June 10, 1548.
Butter Adulteration;Use of Boracic Acid, May 21, 775.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
Re-armament, etc., May 16, 267.
Recruiting, May 16, 271.
Cork Post Office Buildings, New Buildings, Jun 7, 1393.
Eviction Notices;Return, Legislation, proposed, May 23, 976.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 204, 205, 220.
Lord President of the Council
Private Secretary;Salary to be borne on the Educational Vote, May 17, 472.
Salary and Duties, Sinecure Office, alleged, May 17, 465.
Mallow;Arbitration under Labourers Acts;Refusal of Local Government Board to appoint Mr. J. Byrne as Arbitrator, May 14, 56.
Monaghan County, Fair Rent Appeals;Mr. Justice Meredith's Comments, May 16, 267.
Munster, Agricultural Instruction in;Mallow Conference, May 20, 600.
South African War;Farm Burning, Reasons assigned in the Returns, etc., May 20, 579; May 23, 951.
Folkestone Corporation Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
Foreign Affairs
"Policy governs Armaments"
O. Mr. Bryce, May 20, 711.
Foreign Competition
see Trade and Commerce.
Foreign Office
Secretary of State;Marquess of Lans-downe.
Under Secretary;Viscount Cranborne.
Foreign Policy
"Bouncing" Policy of the Government Os. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, May 21, 835; Mr. A. J. Balfour 840.
"Policy Governs Armaments"
Os. Mr. Bryce, May 20, 711; Sir R. Reid, May 21, 796.
Forestry
Afforesting in Ireland and Scotland, see titles Ireland and Scotland.
Instruction;Number of Students attending Government-aided Lectures
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 14, 53.
Forests
India;State Forests Revenue
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 7, 1322.
Foster, Sir W. [Derby, Ilkeston]
Charities and Charity Commissioners Landed Property, Sale of, May 17, 497; May 23, 971.
Trustees;Disqualification of Nonconformists, Case of St. Cross Hospital, Winchester, etc., May 17, 483, 489.
Income Tax Collection in Scotland, June 7, 1353.
Irvine, Dr. H. W., Appointment of, as Inspector of Schools at Birmingham, May 23, 1042.
Post Office Employees' Grievances, Committee of Inquiry;Increased Facilities for Answering Letters at Post Offices, June 7, 1375.
South African War;Typhoid Fever and Plague Statistics, May 23, 951.
Supply;Form of Presenting Estimates, Vote for the Mint, Complaint, May 17, 506.
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir H. H. [Wolverhampton, E.]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 615, 634, 639, 641, 644, 645, 646, 666, 668; May, 21, 828.
Local Taxation;Report of Royal Commission, June 10, 1474.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill;Government Intentions, May 16, 276.
France
Canada;Subsidised Steamship Service between Canadian and French ports
Q. Mr. J. Lowther, A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 20, 588.
National Expenditure
O. Mr. Cohen, May 20, 670.
Navy;Construction of Fast Cruisers
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 23, 956.
Normandy Cider, Production of;Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Trade Reports Presented, May 17, 400; June 10, 1441.
Workmen, Facilities of Locomotion;Report Presented, June 6, 1212.
Frankfort de Montmorency, Visc.
Military Instruction (Schools and Cadets) Bill, Com., May 14, 11.
"Free Breakfast Table"
O. Mr. Hanbury, May 21, 803.
Freeman, Constable
Conviction for Assault
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1124.
Friendly Societies
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, see that title.
Registry;Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 504.
Fuller, Mr. J. M. F. [Wilts, Westbury]
Army
Horses;System of Purchasing, June 6, 1245, 1268.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 333.
South African War
Refuge Camps, Condition of, Mortality among Children, etc., May 24, 1195.
Wiltshire Volunteer Service Company;Stoppage of War Gratuity, June 7, 1314.
Funded and Unfunded Debt
see National Debt.
Furness, Sir C. [Hartlepool]
Jameson Raid Indemnity and British South Africa Company, May 21, 761.
Kimberley, Siege of;Claims of De Beers Company, May 21, 761.
G
Galway
M'Clung, Mr., Clerk at Galway Gaol-Attending Street Preaching, Transference to Dublin, etc.
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 978.
Gambling
see Betting.
Garrison Regiments
see Army.
Gas Companies
Metropolis;Accounts for 1900 Presented, May 14, 10, 43.
Gas Orders Confirmation Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 724.
Gas and Water Works Facilities Act 1870
Gas Provisional Orders, Dispensing with Consent of District Councils;Board of Trade Report Presented, May 16, 236; May 17, 400.
Gateshead and District Tramways Bill
l. Report * May 20, 534.
3R. * June 10, 1438.
Germany
Cable Communication;Emden-Ireland Cable, Transfer of Landing Place from Valentia to Waterville
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 445.
Guns, Purchase for British Army;Votes in Supply
Q. Mr. E. J. C. Morton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 8, 1321.
Iron Trade, 1899&#x2013;1900;Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Shipping Enterprise;Hamburg-American Steamship Company, Co-operation with North-German Lloyd. Company;Trade Development in China
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 10, 1462.
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1442.
Workmen, Facilities of Locomotion;Report Presented, June 6, 1212.
Gibraltar
Garrison Regiments
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1165, 1199.
Consulting Government of Gibraltar, etc.
Q. Mr. C. Hobhouse; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 585.
Harbour Works Scheme, Inquiry, etc.
Naval Works Bill, Introduction of Q. Mr. G. Bowles; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 24, 1132.
Opportunity for Discussion
Qs. Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. E. Robertson; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 21, 784.
Resignation of Member;Mr. G. Bowles
Qs. Mr. M'Kenna, Mr. J. Redmond, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 7, 1333.
Result of Inquiry
Qs. Mr. E. Robertson, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 610.
Sanitation, etc., Improvements;Report Presented, June 6, 1212.
Gilhooly, Mr. J. [Cork Co., W.]
Baltimore Postal Facilities, etc., May 21, 783; June 10, 1566.
Glasgow
Vaccination, Expenditure by Corporation;Return Presented, June 6, 1213.
Glasgow Corporation (Police) Provisional Order Confirmation Bill
l. 1R. * June 10, 1438.
Glasgow and Renfrew District Railway Transfer Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 722.
Glasgow and South-Western Railway Bill
c. Con. * May 17, 436.
3R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Glucose
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposals
Alteration of Duty on Glucose Beach's, Sir M. H., Supplementary Statement, June 10, 1476.
Customs and Excise Duties, Inequality of
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 10, 1464.
English-made Glucose, Delay in levying Duty, etc.
Q. Mr. Bartley; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 251.
Goa
Trade Report Presented, May 21, 725.
Goddard, Mr. D. F. [Ipswich]
Army
Engineers' Services, Increase in Vote, May 24, 1173.
Ordnance Factories, Pay of Superintendents, etc., June 6, 1281.
Army Estimates;Making use of certain Votes for other purposes than those for which they were granted, May 24, 1200, 1202.
Charities;Disqualifications of Nonconformists as Trustees, etc., May 17, 492.
Lord President of the Council
Private Secretary, May 17, 472.
Salary, Duties, etc., Sinecure Office, alleged, May 17, 463.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1488.
Treasury Valuer, Salary of, etc., June 6, 1289.
Golborne Gas Bill
c. Report, * May 10, 234.
Con. * May 24, 1103.
3R. * June 10, 1450.
Gold Coast
Labour Ordinance of 1893;Amendments proposed
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 10, 1464.
Gold Mines
see titles Transvaal and Wales.
Gordon, Mr. J. [Londonderry, S.]
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 200.
Gorst, Right Hon. Sir J. E.;Vice-President of the Board of Education [Cambridge University]
Architect;Duties of Consulting Architect, Interviewing Persons submitting plans, etc., May 23, 968.
Bolton Pupil Teachers' Central Classes;Payment at Evening Rates, May 23, 967.
Bradford, All Saints' School Accommodation;Recognition for 816 Children, May 23, 967.
Code of 1901;Cookery and Cottage Gardening, Lowering Age for Grants, etc., proposed, May 20, 595.
Corporal Punishment;Excessive Punishment in Infants' School at Billinghay, May 20, 594.
Darken, St. John's Culvert Schools, Accounts;Including Salary of Organist, alleged, May 23, 966.
Dover School Accommodation, Insufficiency of, May 23, 966.
Inspectors
Instructions to;Date of Issue to Members, June 7, 1323.
Irvine, Dr. H. W., Appointment of as Inspector of Schools at Birmingham, May 23, 1046.
Women Sub-Inspectors, Promotion of, etc., May 20, 595.
Lord President of the Council;Private Secretary's Salary, Duties, etc., May 17, 470.
Goulding, Mr. E. A. [Wilts, Devizes]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 354.
Government Contracts
Fair Wage Clause, Evasion of by Government Contractors in Scotland
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 261.
Government Property
Rates, Payment in lieu of;Treasury Valuer, Salary, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1289, 1295.
Granard Union
Labourers' Cottages Scheme;Reconsidering Applications, proposed
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 602.
Workhouse;Employment of Trained Nurse, Remuneration, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 601.
Grangemouth Water Provisional Order Confirmation Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 38
Grant, Mr. Corrie [Warwickshire, Rugby]
Army Estimates, Lack of Detail, June 6, 1240.
Questions in the House;Verbatim Report of Answers to Questions on the following day, June 7, 1333.
Surveyors of Taxes, Position of, Necessity for Creating New Districts, June 7, 1336.
Treasury, Valuer, Salary, etc., June 6, 1295.
Gray, Mr. E. [West Ham, N.]
Darwen, St. John's Culvert Schools, Accounts;Including Salary of Organist, alleged, May 23, 966.
Dover School Accommodation, Insufficiency of, May 23, 965.
Great Central Railway Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
2R. * June 10, 1437.
Great Northern Railway Bill
l. Report*, May 20, 534.
Great Southern and Western Railway Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 398.
c. 1R. * May 20, 576.
Great Southern and Western Railway Company, Ireland
Through Rates for Irish Produce, etc.
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 17, 458; Qs. Mr. Field, A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 24, 1128.
Great Western Railway
Brake Trials, Result of, etc.
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 16, 253.
Greece
Morea;Importation of British Goods
Q. Mr. Brigg; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 17, 447.
Trade Reports Presented, May 17, 400; June 10, 1441.
Griffith, Mr. E. J. [Anglesey]
Postage Stamps;Designs for New Stamps, Entrusting to Austrian Artist, May 23, 974; June 6, 1216.
Grosmont
Misdirected Telegrams;Postmaster giving Information respecting Telegrams
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Mr. A Chamberlain, May 21, 777.
Gully, Rt. Hon. W. C.
see Speaker.
Gun Licences, Ireland
Masterson P.;Refusal to Grant Licence Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1470
Guns
Army, see that title.
Gurdon, Sir Brampton [Norfolk, N.]
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, Invasion of Rights of Private Members, etc., May 23, 991.
Lord President of the Council's Private Secretary, Salary, Duties, etc., May 17, 472.
Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister Bill;Moving Adjournment of the House to a date posterior to that fixed for Com. Stage, May 16, 275.
Gwynfynydd
Gold Mine;Royalties
Q. Mr. Moss; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 23, 962.
H
Habitual Drunkards Bill
l. Com. May 17, 401.
Habitual Drunkards Bill
Debate in Committee (Lords), May 17, 401.
Drunken Person in Charge of Child under seven years, Arrest of, 409.
Government Changes in the Bill Treating as Government Bill in the House of Commons, etc., 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 415.
Husband of drunken wife, Extension of Bill to, 407, 408.
Ireland, Application of Bill to, 402, 403, 415.
Licences
Endorsement of, Abolition, 413, 414.
Suspension of, 413, 414.
Notices to licence-holders, Serving, 406.
Onus of Proof;Definition of "reasonable steps" to prevent Drunkenness, 411.
Order of Detention, Authority to make, 406.
Penalty for habitual drunkard asking to be served as well as publican serving, 406.
Person drunk in public place, Arrest of, 410.
Register of Convictions, Keeping, 411.
Security for good behaviour, Drunken person finding on conviction, 410.
Petitions, May 20, 576; June 10, 1445.
Hain, Mr. E. [Cornwall, St. Ives]
Roumanian Ports;Quarantine Regulations, May 23, 960.
Haldane, Mr. R. B. [Haddington]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 648.
Halsbury, Earl of;Lord Chancellor
Prevention of Corruption (No. 2) Bill, Intro., May 21, 739; 2R., June 10, 1446.
Hamburg American Steamship Company
Co-operation with North-German Lloyd Company, German Trade Development, see China;Yang-tsze Valley.
Hamilton, Rt. Hon. Lord George;Secretary of State for India [Middlesex, Ealing]
Bombay Victoria Technical Institute;Sending Mechanical Engineer from Europe, May 20, 587.
Burma Rubber Trees, Developing Cultivation of, etc., May 17, 444.
Central Provinces;New Bishopric, proposed, etc., May 16, 247.
China
Peking Legations, Defence and Relief of;War Medals, May 23, 960.
Tientsin;Affray between French and British Troops, June 10, 1463.
Famine;Extent of Numbers in Receipt of Relief, Suspension of Information, May 16, 248.
Forests;State Forests Revenue, June 7, 1322.
Frontier, N. W., Afghan Tribal Feuds-Attack on South Waziri Militia, etc., May 23, 959.
Manual Industries, Development of;Mr. Chatterton's Memorandum, May 20, 588.
Poppy Cultivation in Bengal, Increase of, etc., May 23, 958.
Railways, Light Railway Schemes;Co-operation of local Capitalists, Ganjam District Scheme, etc., May 23, 958.
Hamilton Burgh Provisional Order Confirmation Bill
c. Con., May 24, 1101; June 10, 1448.
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. R. W.;Prssident of the Board of Agriculture [Preston]
Agricultural Holdings Act;Applications for Arbitrators, May 20, 593.
Agricultural Labour Contracts, Breach of;Amendment of Statute of Frauds, May 17, 453.
Butter
Adulteration
Fixing Standard of Quality, etc., May 16, 257; May 17, 452; May 21, 775.
Milk charged with Boracic Acid, Forcing into Butter by means Spiral Machine, etc., May 17, 452; May 21, 774.
Foreign Butter, sold in Irish Pyramid Boxes;Prosecutions, etc., May 14, 60.
Canadian Live Cattle Trade with England, Embargo on, May 20, 592.
Dogs;Importation of Irish Dogs into Great Britain, Relaxing Prohibition, May 16, 275.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 797.
Forestry, Instruction in;Number of Students, etc., May 14, 53.
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill, 2R., May 17, 429.
Milk;Fixing Standard for, May 24, 1118, 1119; June 7, 1326.
Southampton, Ordnance Survey Assistants at;Reduction in Numbers, etc., June 7, 1325.
Welsh Regiment, Volunteer Service Company;Pet Goat and Quarantine Regulations, May 17, 442.
Handsworth Urban District Council Bill
l. 3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R. * May21, 848.
Hankow
Trade Report Presented, May 17, 400.
Hannah, Private
Compassionate Allowance
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Lord Stanley, May 23, 955.
Hardie, Mr. Keir [Merthyr Tydvil]
Civil List Bill, Com., June 10, 1499, 1507, 1514, 1528.
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Committee of Inquiry, proposed, June 10, 1562, 1578.
Waiters in London Restaurants;Hours of Labour, Legislation proposed, June 7, 1323.
Hardwicke, Earl of;Under-Secretary of State for India
Liquor and Opium Shops in India;Tea-planters' Complaints, etc., May 20, 570.
South-Eastern and London, Chatham, and Dover Railways Bill, 3R., May 14, 7.
Harpenden District Gas Bill
l. Report, * May 20, 534.
Harrington, Mr. T. [Dublin Harbour]
Dublin Corporation (Markets, etc.) Bill, Recom., May 17, 423.
Harris, Lord
Rifle Ranges;Yeomanry using Ranges provided by the Government, May 17, 421.
Harrogate Corporation Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 14, 2.
Harrogate Water Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 20, 534.
Harwood, Mr. G. [Bolton]
Bolton Pupil Teachers' Central Classes;Payment at Evening Rates, May 23, 967.
China;Indemnity, Exceeding Expenses Incurred, etc., May 20, 608.
Haverfordwest
Welsh-speaking Witnesses in County Court;Remarks of Judge Bishop
Q. Mr. Philipps; A. Sir R, Finlay, June 7, 1324.
Hay, Mr. C. (Shoreditch, Hoxton]
Post Office Employees' Grievances, June 7, 1375.
Telegraphists;Granting Day's Leave on May 24, May 23, 972.
Hayter, Rt. Hon Sir A. D. [Walsall]
Army
Army Corps Commanders replacing Present Officers;Extension of Powers, etc., May 23, 954.
Commanding Officers of Districts, Granting more Departmental Power to, May 24, 1165.
Horses, System of Purchase. June 6, 1266.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 123; May 16, 282.
Yeomanry Transport Arrangements on board s.s. "Lusitania," June 6, 1225.
Healy, Mr. T. M. [Louth, N.]
Addis, Private J., Death of;Grant for Mother, May 21, 764.
Ardrossan Harbour Order Confirmation Bill, Con., May 15, 170.
Bonded Warehouses;Fortifying Wine, May 23, 961; May 24, 1118.
Business of the House;Friday Sittings, Adjournment of the House after Supply had been disposed of, Irish Members' Protest, May 17, 532.
Civil Service, Female Typists in;Nomination of Candidates, May 23, 975.
Constabulary, Royal Irish-Viceregal Commission, Names and Positions of Members, etc., May 16, 271.
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1150, 1158, 1161.
Dublin Corporation (Markets, etc.) Bill, Recom., May 17, 423.
Dublin, Registry of Deeds Office;Delivery of Telegrams to Searchers, May 21, 783.
Hamilton Burgh Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, Con., May 24, 1101, 1103.
Labourers (Ireland) Act Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 917, 938.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 176, 194, 214, 217, 218, 221.
Lights, Commissioners of;Second-class Clerks, proposed Increase of Pay, May 24, 1128.
Louth, County, Trawling off;Re-enacting Disallowed Bye-law, May 21, 781.
M'Clung, Mr., Clerk at Galway Gaol, Attending Street Preaching;Transference to Dublin, May 23, 978.
Military Lands Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill, Intro., May 23, 946.
Scottish Board Schools, Prizes out of School Funds;Providing Prizes for Denominational Schools, proposed, May 23, 968.
Transvaal Outlanders, Number serving in the Field, May 24, 1111.
University Education, Ireland;Commission, Names of Members, May 24, 1130.
Valuation of Property;Privy Council Order of Jan, 30, 1899, Applying to General Revaluation, May 21, 782.
Heaton, Mr. J. H. [Canterbury]
Post Office
Mail Service to Australia;Subsidies charged on the Post Office Vote, etc., June 7, 1411, 1412.
Postal Orders, Charges for, Extension of Postal Order System, etc., June 10, 1560.
Postmaster-General sitting in the House of Lords, Unsatisfactory Representation in the House of Commons, June 10, 1558.
Postmen, Classification of, etc.;Three classes of Postmen, June 10, 1561.
Printing Department, June 10, 1562.
Stamps of the Empire and of Foreign Countries, Arrangements at the Post Office for exchanging, June 10, 1561.
South African War;Strength of British Regiments in South Africa, May 23, 953.
Telegrams;Charge of twopence for Receipt, June 10, 1559.
Turkey;Postal Service, Turkish attempt to Abolish Foreign Post Offices, May 16, 248.
Helme, Mr. N- W. [Lancashire, Lancaster]
Volunteers;Colours for Corps supplying Contingents for South African War, proposed, May 21, 765.
Hemphill, Rt. Hon. C. H. [Tyrone, N.]
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 939.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 224.
Heneage, Lord
Habitual Drunkards Bill, Com., May 17, 411, 413.
Licensing Boards Bill, 2R., May 14, 25, 26.
Licensing Sessions Bill, Com., May 17, 419.
Herbert Estate
Conference;Attendance of Police Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469.
Hereditary Revenues of the Crown
Ownership of, etc.; see Civil List Bill;Crown Lands.
Hereford, Bishop of
Betting;Inquiry, Motion for Select Committee, May 20, 541.
Herries, Lord
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Committee to consider terms of Declaration, May 20, 569.
Herring Fisheries
Destruction of Herrings at Kinsale;Glut in Local Markets
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. Wvndham, May 16, 269.
Heywood and Middleton Water Board Bill
l. Report, * May 21, 722.
Hickman, Sir A. [Wolverhampton, W.]
Railway Materials, Purchase of, for Railways under control of the British Government;Defects of American Locomotives, etc., May 23, 1024.
High Court of Justice
see Law Courts.
Highland Railway Order Confirmation Bill
c. Con. * and 3R. * May 15, 171.
l. 1R.* May 17, 399.
3R. * May 20, 539.
Highlands and Islands of Scotland
Afforestation;Proposed Experiments Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 24, 1120.
Lewis, Island of, see that title.
Highland Railway Co.;Mails, Improved Service between Kyle and Inverness
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 55.
Postal Facilities, Increasing
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1367, 1370, 1390 1391; June 10, 1566.
Ross-shire, see that title.
Historical Documents
see Records.
Historical Manuscripts Commission
Cecil Manuscripts, see that title.
Reports;Distribution of, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 523.
Hoare, Mr. E. B. [Hampstead]
Hong Kong;Chaplain to the Troops;Appointment, etc., May 16, 246.
Hobhouse, Mr. C. E. H. [Bristol, E.]
Aldershot Sewage Farm;Drainage and Sewage of New Barracks to be erected on Salisbury Plain, etc., May 24, 1166.
Boer Prisoners;Hospital Ship at Colombo, June 6, 1225, 1232.
Charities;Disqualifications of Nonconformists as Trustees, etc., May 17, 491.
China, Tientsin;Affray between French and British Troops, June 10, 1463.
Gibralta and Malta Garrison Regiments' Accommodation;Married Quarters, May 24, 1199.
Consulting Governments of Malta, etc., May 20, 585.
Horses for the Army
Horses, etc., acquired for Service in South Africa and China, Estimated Proceeds from Sale, June 6, 1276.
Registration, Wastage in South Africa, etc., June 6, 1256.
Privy Council Registrar, Amount of Time spent at Official Duties, etc., May 17, 478.
Hobhouse, Mr. H. [Somerset, E.]
Census;Classification of London, May 23, 964.
Holidays, Public
Queen Victoria's Birthday, see that title.
Holland, Mr. W. H. [York, W. R., Rotherham]
Charity Commissioners;Endowed School Work, Number of Schemes of Commissioners, etc., May 17, 500.
Home Office
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. C. T. Ritchie.
Under Secretary;Rt. Hon. Jesse Collings.
City of London Commissioner of Police;Acting independently of the Home Office
Q. Col. Lockwood; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 10, 1464.
Hong Kong
Chaplain to the Troops, Appointment, etc. Q. Mr. B. Hoare; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 246.
Honley Urban District Council (Gas) Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 399.
Hope, Mr. J. D. [Fife, W.]
Queensferry, North, Fortifications;Boundary Fence, May 17, 442.
Hope, Mr. J. Fitzalan [Sheffield, Bright-side]
Post Office Department, Lack of Initiative and Business Methods;Unfair Criticism on Officials, June 7, 1373.
Horley District Gas Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 722.
Horses
Army
Registration of Horses, Payment for, by War Office, etc.
O. Mr. C. Hobhouse, June 6, 1256.
Remounts, Purchase of
Comparison with Horses purchased in different countries;Superiority of English horses, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1246, 1248, 1251, 1257, 1258, 1259.
System of Purchase, Cost, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1245, 1246, 1250, 1253, 1263, 1266.
Reserve;Number of Horses in Reserve on the Outbreak of War, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1262, 1264.
South African War, see that title.
Veterinary Department of the Army, see Army.
Weight carried by;Excessive Weight
Os. Sir H. Meysey-Thompson, June 6, 1266; Mr. B. Langley, 1268.
Yeomanry, Imperial, Purchase of Horses in Austria-Hungary, see Yeomanry.
Horsham Gas Provisional Order
Board of Trade Report as to dispensing with consent of District Council Presented, May 16, 236; May 17, 400.
Hospitals (Exemption from Rates) Bill
Petitions, May 16, 234.
House of Commons
see Parliament.
House of Lords
see Parliament.
Housing of the Working Classes
Workmen's Trains;Standing Order 22, Government Pledges, etc.
Q. Mr. Chaplin; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 609.
Housing of Working Classes (Repayment of Loans) Bill
Petitions, May 16, 234; May 17, 439; May 21, 758; May 22, 882; June 6, 1210; June 7, 1312.
Hull, Barnsley and West Biding Junction Railway and Dock Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
2R.* June 10, 1438.
Humber Commercial Railway and Dock Bill
c. Con., June 10, 1447.
I
Ice Creams
Sale in London Streets;Deaths from Ptomaine Poisoning, etc.
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. Long, May 20, 593.
Ilkeston and Heanor Water Board Bill
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
Immigration
see Emigration and Immigration.
Imperialism
Churchill, Mr. Winston;"Hereditary desire to run Imperialism on the Cheap"
O. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 310.
Imports and Exports
Morea;Imports of British Goods
Q. Mr. Brigg; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 17, 447.
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill
c. 2R., May 17, 423.
Income Tax
Abatements
Difficulty of Obtaining Rebatements, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1335, 1338, 1340
Loss to the Exchequer;Number and Amount of Abatements
Q. Mr. Carew; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 249.
Budget Proposal
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 640; May 21, 823; May 23, 1059.
Commissioners, Mode of Appointing, Legal Assistance for persons appearing before the Commissioners, etc.
References to in Debate in Corn, of Supply, June 7, 1336, 1339, 1340, 1343.
Date of Collection in England, Scotland, and Ireland;Closer collection in Scotland
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1339, 1342, 1343, 1344, 1349, 1351.
Surveyors of Taxes, Deficiency in Numbers;Formation of New Districts, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1335, 1337, 1338, 1341.
India
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. Lord G. Hamilton.
Under-Secretary;Earl of Hard-wicke.
Afghan Tribal Feuds, see sub-heading Frontier, N. W.
Army
Defence of India;Military Expenditure, etc.
References to in Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 646; May 21, 795.
Staff Corps Officers;Petitions for redress of Grievance, June 7, 1312.
Time-expired Men, Number of Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 956.
Bishopric for the Central Provinces, see sub heading Central Provinces.
Bombay Victoria Technical Institute;Sending Mechanical Engineer from Europe, etc.
Q. Sir M. Bhownaggree; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 20, 587.
Burmah, see that title.
Cable Communication, see sub-heading Telegraph Rates.
Central Provinces;New Bishopric, proposed, Cost to Indian Exchequer
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton May 16, 247.
Famine, Extent of, Number in receipt of Relief;Suspension of Information
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 16, 247.
Forests;State Forests Revenue
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 7, 1322.
Frontier, North-West;Afghan Tribal Feuds;Attack on South Waziri Militia, etc.
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 23, 959.
Liquor and Opium Shops;Tea Planters' Complaints, etc.
Os. Lord Kinnaird, May 20, 569; Earl of Hardwicke, 570.
Manual Industries, Development of;Mr. Chatterton's Memorandum, etc.
Q. Sir M. Bhownaggree; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 20, 588.
Poppy Cultivation in Bengal, Increase of;Discouraging Manufacture of Opium
Q. Mr. S. Smith; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 23, 958.
Railways
American Materials, defects of;Construction of Gokteik Viaduct, etc.
O. Sir A. Hickman, May 23, 1024.
Light Railway Schemes;Co-operation of Local Capitalists, Ganjam District Scheme, etc.
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 23, 957.
Tea Planters' Complaints, see sub-heading Liquor and Opium Shops.
Telegraph Rates, Reduction of;Granting German Right to land Emden-Ireland Cable at Waterville proposed
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 445.
Indo-China, French
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Industrial Property
Papers and Correspondence relative to Meeting at Brussels Presented, May 14, 10.
Industrial Schools
see Reformatory and Industrial Schools.
Inebriates' Acts Amendment Bill
c. 1R. * May 24, 1134.
Inland Revenue Department
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, June 7, 1335.
Staff, Alterations in;Increased Cost, etc. Os. Mr. Whitley, June 7, 1347; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1349.
Surveyors of Taxes, Deficiency in Numbers;Formation of New Districts, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1335, 1337, 1338, 1341.
Inniskeen
Sunday Post to and from
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. A. Chamberberlain, May 14, 62.
Inquests
see Coroners' Inquests.
Intermediate Education, Ireland
see Education;Irish Questions.
Invalided Soldiers from South Africa
see South African War.
Inverness-shire
Armadale Pier, see Armadale.
Death Certificates;Medical Certificate of Death not a necessary Condition of Burial, Legislation
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 16, 259.
Kyle and Inverness, Improved Mail Train Service;Rearrangement of Mail Steamer Service
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 55.
Ionian Islands
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Ireland
Lord Lieutenant;Earl Cadogan.
Chief Secretary;Rt. Hon. G. Wyndham.
Attorney General;Rt. Hon. J. Atkinson.
Solicitor General;Mr. D. R. Barton.
Lord Chancellor;Lord Ashbourne.
Achonry;Illegal Demonstration, Police Interference
Qs. Mr. O'Dowd; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 57; May 16, 264; Q. Capt, Donelan; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 57.
Afforesting, Number of Acres acquired for Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 274.
Agrarian Outrages Return;Number of Threatening Notices
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 781.
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Department
Farmers' Loans for Purchase of Machinery, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 454; Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1467.
Munster;Mallow Conference, etc. Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 600.
Allotments in Urban Districts, Legislation proposed
Q. Mr. Power; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 981.
Analyst;Government Appointment proposed
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 265.
Ancient Laws, see sub-heading Brehon Laws.
Army Recruiting, Decline in
O. Mr. Dillon, May 14, 80, 87.
Arranmore Island;Hearing Land Cases at Dungloe, etc.
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 977.
Ballincollig Barracks, Condition of O. Col. Legge, May 24, 1173.
Ballivor Petty Sessions;Hedge-cutting Prosecutions, Dismissal of Summonses, etc.
Q. Mr. Carew; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 17, 455.
Baltimore, see that title.
Bank of;Payment to, as Agents of the National Debt Office
Os. Mr. J. P. Farrell, May 17, 515; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 518.
Belfast, see that title.
Birr and Portumna Railway, see that title.
Boyle Town Commissioners
Bye-laws;Records at Dublin Castle, etc.
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 20, 605.
Fairs and Markets Regulations, Powers of Commissioners
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 21, 782.
Brehon Laws, Publication of
O. Mr. T. M. Healy, May 15, 186; Qs. Mr. Boland; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 61.
Budget Proposals;Taxation of Ireland Os. Mr. McCrae, May 20, 693; Mr. Lough, May 23, 1055.
Over-Taxation, alleged;References to in Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 692.
Butter Substitutes;Foreign Butter sold in Pyramid Boxes, etc.
Qs. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; As. Mr. Hanbury, Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 60.
Cadwallader Edward's Estate;Delay in effecting Sale;Bill for Obviating Delays, etc.
Qs. Mr. Ffrench; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Cavan, see that title.
Census
Irish Language, Number of Persons speaking
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 457.
Population of Ireland
Qs. Mr. J. Ellis, Mr. P. O'Brien; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 606.
Preliminary Report; with Abstract of Numerators' Summaries Presented, May 20, 540, 578.
Charitable Loans Act, 1900, Recovery of Debt;Method of making out Accounts, Dromore Magistrate's Instructions to Clerk, etc.
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 23, 983.
Charitable Loans Act see that title.
Clanricarde Estate Evictions;Cost incurred by Government.
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 274.
Congested Districts Board, for collective heading, see that title.
Connaught, Congestion in;Scheduling as Congested District proposed.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 7, 1330.
Constabulary, Royal Irish, for collective heading, see that title.
Cork, see that title.
Coroners' Inquests, Medical Fees at;Fee paid to Dr. Synnott
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 981.
Crown Appointments, Roman Catholics holding, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 268.
Dairy Industry, Improvement of;Loans to Farmers proposed
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469
Direct Labour, Employment of, on Roads, see title Roads.
Dogs;Importation into England Regulations
Q. Col. M'Calmont; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 16, 275.
Drunkenness, Arrests for, Number of;Return Ordered, May 16, 236, Return Presented, June 6, 1213.
Dublin, see that title.
Education, for collective heading, see that title.
Emigration;References to in Debate on Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, May 22, 897, 908, 909, 924.
Evictions, for collective heading see that title.
Farmers, Loans to, see sub-heading Agriculture and Technical Instruction Department
Finlay's Estate, see that title.
Firies Postal Facilities;Reply to Inquiry
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 7, 1330.
Fisheries, for collective heading, see that title.
Granard Union, see that title.
Great Southern and Western Railway Company;Through Rates for Irish Produce
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 17, 458.
Gun Licenses, Refusal of;Case of P. Masterson
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1470.
Herbert Estate Conference;Polieo Attendance
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469.
Historical Documents
Allocation of Money for Publication;Irish Record Commission proposed, etc.
Os. Sir T. Esmonde, May 17, 525; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 527.
Brehon Laws, see that sub-heading.
Industrial Schools, see title Reformatory and Industrial Schools.
Inniskeen, Sunday Post to and from
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 62.
Intermediate Education Examinations;Publication of Programme and Rules for 1902
Q. Mr. W. Johnston; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 456.
Kearon, T., Case of;Street Preaching at Arklow, Conviction for Assault
Qs. Mr. Cogan, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1125.
Kenmare Constabulary and Harvest Work;Assisting District, Inspector
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 777.
Kerry, sec that title.
Killarney House;Police Protection, Cost etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1468.
Kilmarnock Petty Sessions House;Refusing use of Court to District Council, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 21, 779.
Kilrush Postmastership;Filling Vacant Appointment
Q. Maj. Jameson; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 459.
Kinsale, Destruction of Herrings at;Glut in Local Markets
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Knocallassa Grazing Farm Disturbance;Arrest of M'Guinness, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 604.
Labourers' Cottages;for collective heading, see that title.
Land Act, 1896, Section 40;Legislation Proposed
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 603.
Land Commission;for collective heading see that title.
Land Judges' Court, see title Land Commission, Ireland.
Land Purchase
Seaweed Rights
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham May 17, 456.
(see also names of Places, such as Longford, etc.)
Land Purchase Bill, see that title.
Law Courts, see that title.
Lights, Commissioners of;Proposed Increase of Pay for Second-class Clerks
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. G. Bowles, May 24, 1128.
Limerick, see that title.
Longford, see that title.
Louth County, Trawling off;Re-enacting Disallowed Bye-law
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 21, 781.
Lunatic Asylums;for collective headings, see that title.
Mallaranny Cattle Market;Mr. Stoney colliding Tolls and Customs, Want of Weighing Machine, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1470.
Mallow;Arbitration under Labourers Acts, Refusal of Local Government Board to appoint Mr. J. Byrne as Arbitrator, etc.
Qs. Mr. W. Abraham, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 56.
M'Clung, Mr., Clerk at Galway Gaol, attending Street Preaching, Transference to Dublin
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 978.
Militia;for collective heading, see that title.
Miller, C, Case of;Application for Committal to Strabane Industrial School
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 978.
Mitchelstown Union, Labourers' Cottages in;Delay in Progress of Schemes
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1123.
Monaghan, see that title
Morony, D, Case of;Proposed Mitigation of Sentence
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 980.
Munster, Agricultural Instruction in;Mallow Conference
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 600.
National School Teachers;for collective heading, see that title
Nenagh Stamp Distributor;Delay in Appointment
Q. Mr. P. J. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 985.
Newport, County Mayo;Number of Police, Religion, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1471.
Newtown District, Queen's County;Delay in Delivery of Letters
Q. Dr. MacDonnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 986.
Nurses for Workhouses, Employment of Trained Nurses, see title Workhouses, also Names of Workhouses.
Population, see sub-headings Census and Emigration.
Prisoners, see Names of Prisoners.
Rabies;Importation of Dogs into Great Britain from Ireland, see Dogs.
Railways, for collective heading see that title.
Rathdrum Union, Labourers' Cottages Scheme;Appointment of Arbitrator, Delays, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 456.
Registration of Voters;Return Presented, May 24, 1105.
Registry of Deeds Cilice, see Dublin.
Rent Reductions in 1900;Parliamentary Return proposed
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1123.
Revaluation, see sub-heading Valuation.
Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom, Amount Contributed, etc.;Provisional Statement Presented, May 17, 440.
Roads, for collective heading, see that title.
Roman Catholics holding Crown Appointments, see sub-heading Crown Appointments.
Rosmurrevagh;Erection of Pier proposed
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1122.
Sheridan, Sergeant, Dismissal of;Case of Daniel McGoohan
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 59.
Sligo Asylum;Attendant Gaffney, Assault on Patient, etc.
Q. Mr. Moore; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1122.
Spirits, Illicit Distillation;Number of Seizures, Rewards paid to Royal Irish Constabulary, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1339, 1342, 1343, 1345, 1346, June 10, 1555, 1556, 1557.
Stoney's, Mr. V., Estate, Co. Mayo;Sale to Congested Districts Board, Seaweed Rights
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 456.
Strabane, Urban County District, Division into Wards;Order Presented, June 10, 1453.
Strangford Dispensary District;Compelling Guardians to appoint properly qualified Midwife
Q. Mr. W. Johnston; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 979.
Street Preaching;Case of T. Kearon, see sub-heading Kearon.
Style's, Sir W. Estate, Co. Donegal;Sale to Tenants, Fee for Land Certificate, etc.
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 977.
Supreme Court of Judicature;Account of Receipts and Payments Presented, June 7, 1314.
Taxation of Ireland, see sub-heading Budget.
Technical Education;Effect of Repeal Clause of Education Bill
Q. Mr. Loyd; A. Mr. G. Lawson, May 17, 460.
Threatening Notices, see sub-heading Agrarian Outrages.
Training Colleges;Irish Language, Professors of
Q. Mr. J. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 6, 1217.
Trawling, for collective heading, see that title.
Truck Act Infringement;Squire v. Sweeney
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 17, 451.
Tullamore Quarter Sessions;Judge Discharging Jury, Fine, etc.
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1471.
United Irish League
Achonry Meeting, see sub-heading Achonry.
Boycotting and Intimidation;Trial at Cork Assizes, Jury Packing, etc.
O. Mr. J. Gordon, May 15, 206.
Kerry Police, Action of Q. Mr. Flavin; May 24, 1129.
University Education;Names of Commission
Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 24, 1129; Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 7, 1331.
Roman Catholic University Education Question;Petitions, May 14, 42; May 15, 172; May 20, 577; May 21, 758; May 22, 883.
Valuation of Property for Rating Purposes, Privy Council Order of Jan, 30, 1899, Applying to General Re-valuation
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 31, 782.
Volunteers, Drilling with Regulars in Dublin;Expenses incurred, Religion of Volunteers, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 10, 1461.
Warden Estate, Co. Kerry;Rents, Valuators raising Rent of P. Sullivan, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 600.
Waterville, see that title.
Wexford, see that title
Wicklow Artillery Militia;Training at Cork
Q. Mr. Cogan; A. Lord Stanley, May 24, 1115.
Ireland, Island of
Military Works Expenditure Os. Mr. Weir, Lord Stanley, May 24, 1202.
Irish Language
Census Returns;Number of Irish-speaking People in Ireland
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 457.
Teaching of, in Irish Schools Motion (Mr. Doogan), May 21, 848.
Training Colleges and Professors of Irish Language;Marlborough Street College disadvantages
Q. Mr. J. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 6, 1217.
Irish Presbyterian Church Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
3R. * May 21, 758.
l. 1R., May 21, 723.
Iron and Steel Trade
Foreign Competition;America and Germany
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 654, 683.
German Iron Trade 1899&#x2013;1900;Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Irvine, Dr. H. W.
Appointment as Inspector of Schools for Birmingham
Os. Mr. M'Kenna, May 23, 1036; Mr. J. Chamberlain, 1038; Sir W. Foster, 1042; Sir J. Gorst, 1047.
Isle of Man
Elementary School Teachers' Superannuation;Rules Presented, June 6, 1214.
Italy
National Expenditure
O. Mr. Cohen, May 20, 670.
Trade Reports Presented, May 17, 400.
Commerce and Agriculture;Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
J
Jacoby, Mr. J. A. [Derbyshire, Mid]
Arms and Ammunition, etc., Exportation since 1896;Return proposed, May 17, 443.
Jameson, Maj. J. E. [Clare, W.]
Kilrush Postmastership;Filling vacant Appointment, May 17, 459.
Jameson Raid
Boer Claims for Damages, Payment of Qs. Mr. A. Davies; As. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 14, 44.
British South Africa Company, H. M. Government demanding Payment of Indemnity
Q. Sir C. Furness; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 21, 761.
Japan
Trade Reports Presented, May 17, 400; June 10, 1441.
Jeffreys, Mr. A. F. [Hants, N.]
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill, 2R., May 17, 426.
Jenner, Mr.
Murder of, in Somaliland;Correspondence Presented, May 21, 724, 760.
Jessel, Capt. H. M. [St. Pancras, S.]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 337.
Johnston, Mr. W. [Belfast, S.]
Intermediate Education Examinations;Programme and Rules for 1902, May 17, 456.
Strangford Dispensary District;Compelling Guardians to appoint properly qualified Midwife, May 23, 979.
Joicey, Sir J. [Durham, Chester-le-Street]
Coal Tax;Mining Association of Great Britain, Resolution, May 20, 590.
Jones, Mr. D. B. [Swansea District]
Uganda Railway;Col. Gracey's Report, etc., May 16, 248.
Jones, Mr. W. [Carnarvon, Arfon]
Church in Wales;Disestablishment, May 21, 880.
Irish Language, Teaching of, in Irish Schools, May 21, 866.
Joyce, Mr. M. [Limerick]
Coal, Export Duty;Remissions, Coal shipped under Contracts made before April 18th, May 24, 1117.
"Moel Tryran," Loss of, May 16, 256.
Patagonia, Welshmen in;Report of Chaplain of H. M. S. "Flora," etc., May 24, 1116.
Jury System, Ireland
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, see that title.
K
Kearley, Mr. H. E. [Devonport]
Butter Adulteration;Fixing Standard of Quality, etc., May 16, 257.
Dockyard Police, Lodging Allowance and Additional Pay, etc., June 6, 1290.
High Courts of Justice Clerks;Compulsory Retirement, May 16, 262.
Marines
Commissions from the Ranks;In-filigibility for Appointments of Barrack master and Paymaster, May 14, 51.
Promotion of Majors for Service in China, May 14, 51.
Navy, Victualling;Report of Departmental Committee, May 21, 767.
Railway Brake Trials, Result, etc., May 16, 253.
South African War, Naval Brigade;War Honours for Warrant Officers, May 17, 441.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1487.
Kearon, T.
Street Preaching at Arklow;Imprisonment for Assault, Proposed Mitigation of Sentence
Qs. Mr. Cogan, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1125.
Kenmare
Constabulary and Harvest Work;Assisting District Inspector
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 777.
Kennedy, Mr. P. J. [Westmeath, N.]
Lunatic Asylums, Ireland;County Council providing Auxiliary Asylum independently of other Counties in District, June 10, 1469.
Kenyon, Mr. G. T. [Denbigh]
Boilers at Government Works, Extravagance in Coal, etc., May 24, 1172.
Kerry
Representative on Congested Districts Board, proposed;Moving Bog, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 7, 1329.
Police and United Irish League O. Mr. Flavin, May 24, 1129.
Kettering Urban District Water Bill
c 3R. * May 16, 233.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
Killarney House
Police Protection;Cost, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1468.
Kilmallock
Petty Sessions House;Refusing Use of Court to District Council, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 21, 779.
Kilrush
Postmastership;Filling Vacant Appointment
Q. Major Jameson; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 459.
Kimber, Mr. H. [Wandsworth]
Municipal Trading;Reappointment of Committee, May 20, 609.
King Edward VI. Grammar School, Birmingham
Scheme for Management Presented, June 6, 1213.
King Edward VII.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against, see Roman Catholicism.
Kingston-upon-Hull Corporation Bill
c. Con. * May 20, 573.
3R. * May 23, 945.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1438.
Kinnaird, Lord
Indian Liquor and Opium Shops;Tea Planters' Complaints, etc., May 20, 569.
Kinsale
Destruction of Herrings;Glut in Local Markets
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Kitchener, Lord
see South African War.
Knocallassa
Grazing Farm Disturbance;Arrest of M'Guinness, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 604.
Korea
Brown, Mr. M., Director-General of Customs;Dismissal
O. Earl Spencer, May 21, 730.
Kyle
Inverness and Kyle, Improved Mail Train Service;Rearrangement of Mail Steamer Service
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 55.
L
Labouchere, Mr. H. [Northampton]
Civil List Bill, Com., June 10, 1490, 1497, 1508, 1511, 1517, 1521, 1525, 1529.
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1138, 1148.
Finance Bill, 2R. May 20, 662.
Lord President of the Council, Salary and Duties, Sinecure Office Alleged, May 17, 466.
Metric System;Reports of Consular Agents, Legislation Proposed, June 7, 1327.
Post Office, Pensions held by Officials;Regulations, May 20, 596.
South African War
Expenditure;Amount Paid to Contractors, June 7, 1317.
Farm Burning;Destruction of Gen. De Wet's House, May 24, 1109.
Kitchener, Lord;Correspondence with Colonial Office and War Office, June 7, 1317.
Peace Negotiations with Gen. Botha, June 7, 1318, 1319.
Transport Service;Demurrage, Payments for, June 6, 1226.
Labour
Agricultural Labour Contracts, Breach of Amendment of Statute of Frauds
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 17, 453.
Fair Wage Resolution, see that title.
Labour Ordinance
Gold Coast;Amendments of Ordinance Proposed
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 10, 1464.
Labourers' Cottages, Ireland
Granard Union Scheme;Reconsidering Application, proposed
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 602.
Longford
District Council Scheme;Erection of additional Houses, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 602.
Refusal of Applications
Qs. Mr. J. P. Farrell; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 10, 272.
Mallow Arbitrator, Refusal to appoint Mr. Byrne
Qs. Mr. Abraham, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 56.
Mitchelstown Union;Delay in Progress of Schemes
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr Wyndham, May 24, 1123.
Rathdrum Union Scheme;Appointment of Arbitrator, Delays, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 456.
Rural Auxiliary Postmen;Right to apply for Cottages
Q. Mr. Crean; A. Mr. Wyndham May 23, 981.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill
c. 2R., May 22, 884.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill
Debate on second reading (Commons), May 22, 884
Allotments Act;Compensation Scheme, etc., extension to Ireland, 896, 918, 929, 930, 935, 938
Cost of Administration of Labourers Acts, 933.
Delays in putting Acts into Operation, 886, 902.
Emigration, Remedy for, 897, 908, 909, 924.
Extension of Labourers Acts to others than Agricultural Labourers, 891, 901, 911, 915, 917, 920, 929, 933.
Land Commission, Sub-Commissioners, Appeals to, instead of Privy Council, 895, 904, 914, 923, 926, 927, 938.
Local Government Board Administration, Attack on, 887, 902, 910, 912.
Privy Council (Ireland) Abolition of;Cost of Appeals, etc., 894, 904, 909, 913, 915, 922, 936, 940.
Rating Power, Extension of, 894, 913, 919, 927.
Representations, Alteration by Local District Council, 893.
Unexpended Grants, taking from Counties refusing to put Acts into Operation and Redistributing, 896, 906, 914.
Lambert, Mr. G. [Devon, S. Molton]
Agricultural Holdings Act;Applications for Arbitrators, May 20, 593.
Aldershot Sewage Farms Increase in Expenditure, Upkeep of Salisbury Plain, etc., May 24, 1175, 1177.
Army
Engineers' Services;Commission paid on Work done, May 24, 1174.
Horses, Purchase of;Corrupt Practices of British Officers, Alleged, June 6, 1265.
Coaling Stations;Garrisoning with Marines, etc., May 16, 243.
Milk;Fixing Standard for, May 24, 1118, 1119.
South African War
De Wet's, Gen., Farm, Destruction of, etc., May 16, 242.
Military Convicts in Civil Prisons, June 7, 1316.
Slaughtering of Cattle, Establishment of Government Stock Farms, etc., May 23, 1020; May 24, 1111.
Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway (Dearne Valley Junction Railways) Bill
c. Con. * May 17, 436.
3R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway (Various Powers) Bill
c. 3R. * May 16, 233.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
Lancaster, County of
Inquiry into Charities;Further Return Presented, May 15, 173.
Land
Ireland, Purchase of Land, etc., see Ireland, also names of places.
Land Commission, Ireland
Arranmore Island;Hearing Cases at Duugloe, Inconvenience caused by, etc.
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 977.
Cadwallader Edward's Estate;Delay in Effecting Sale
Qs. Mr. Ffrench; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Cavan, County;Fair Rent Appeals, Number Pending, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 980.
Finlay's Estate, see that title.
Land Judges' Court
Appeals from Decision of Sub-Commissioners, Number of, at Monaghan, etc.;Mr. Justice Meredith's Comments
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 267.
Receivers' Department;Expenses and Fees, etc.
Q. Mr. Macartney; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 275.
Salaries of Receivers, Payment out of Estates in the Court, etc.
Q. Mr. Ffrench; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 605.
Proceedings;Return Presented, May 20, 540, 578.
Rent Reductions in 1900;Return proposed
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1123.
Rules under Land Purchase Acts Presented, June 6, 1213.
Style's, Sir W., Estate, County Donegal;Sale to Tenants, Fee for Land Certificate
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 977.
Warden Estate, County Kerry;Valuators raising rent of P. Sullivan, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 600.
Land Rating (England and Wales) Bill
Petitions, May 14, 42; June 7, 1312.
Land Registry
Work done under various Acts;Return Ordered, May 24, 1106.
Langley, Mr. Batty [Sheffield, Attercliffe]
Army Horses, Purchase of;Size, etc. June 6, 1268.
Lansdowne, Marquess of;Secretary of State far Foreign Affairs
Army Reform;Six Army Corps Organisation, etc., May 21, 752.
China, Situation in, May 21, 730.
South African War, Conduct of the War;Defective Maps, etc., May 21, 752.
Turkey;Postal Service, Turkish attempt to abolish Foreign Post Offices, May 21, 726.
Larceny Bill
c. 2R., June 10, 1541.
Law Courts;High Court of Justice, etc.
Compulsory Retirement of Clerks;Application of Rules of the Ridley Commission
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 262.
Ireland
Cash Balance;Proposed Loans to Irish Industries, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 24, 1127.
Regulations for Distribution of Business
Qs. Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Atkinson, May 23, 982; May 24, 1127.
Supreme Court of Judicature;Account of Receipts and Payments of Accountant-General, Return Ordered, June 7, 1314;Presented, June 10, 1454.
Supreme Court of Judicature, England and Wales;Account of Receipts and Payments Presented, June 7, 1314.
Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) Bill, see that title.
Lawrence, Mr. W. F. [Liverpool, Abercromby]
Charity Commission Inquiries;Compiling List of Charities, Inquiry in South Wiltshire, June 10, 1467.
Steamship Subsidies Select Committee;Motion for Instruction to Committer, May 20, 720.
Laws
Ancient Laws of Ireland, see Brehon Laws.
Lawson Mr. J. Grant;Secretary to the Local Government Board [York, N. R., Thirsk]
Education Bill;Irish Technical Education, Effect of Repeal Clause, May 17, 460.
Lead Poisoning
Increase in Number of Serious Cases, etc. Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 17, 450.
Potteries Arbitration;Home Office Control
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 7, 1323.
Leave of Absence for Members
Bignold, Mr., June 7, 1335.
Lee, Ex-Private
Ill-treatment at Netley Hospital, alleged Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14 49.
Lee, Mr. Arthur [Hants, Fareham]
Army;Reorganisation, Government Proposals, May 14, 66.
South African War;Vlakfontein Engagement, False Statements from the Front, June 7, 1320.
War Office Organisation;Report of Committee, Opportunity for Discussion, June 7, 1331.
Leeds
Volunteers, Active Service;Month's Furlough on Full Pay for Soldiers returning from South Africa Regulations;Leeds Engineer Volunteer Complaint
Q. Mr. Cautley; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 243.
Leeds Corporation (General Powers) Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 14, 2.
3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Leeds Corporation Water Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 20, 534.
Leese, Sir J. [Lancashire, Accrington]
Income Tax Commissioners, Election of, etc., June 7, 1343.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill
c. 2R., May 15, 175.
Debate on Second Reading (Commons), May 15, 175.
Coercion Act, Repeal of, 190, 192, 204, 207, 209, 213, 223.
Costs, Crown Liability for, 191.
Crown Right to Challenge, 182, 184, 193, 203, 206, 208, 213, 225.
Election Petition Trials, Two Commissioners for, 190, 192.
Freemasons and Orangemen as Jurors, 179, 194, 200.
Grand Juries, Abolition of, 182, 220.
High Court, Examination of Evidence taken in Inferior Court, 210.
Judicial Reform in Ireland during the last Half-century, 190, 217.
Juries Detention Act, Alteration of, 197, 204.
Lixnaw Case, Trial in Cork, 206.
Official Record of Proceedings;Shorthand Writers, 192, 200, 210, 228.
Press Comments on Cases sub judice, 222, 227.
Qualifications, of Jurors, 177, 195, 201, 209, 212, 214, 226.
Dublin, Qualification in, 181, 183, 195, 216.
Right of Appeal
Contempt of Court;Limitation of Term of Imprisonment, etc., 189, 197, 207, 221, 226.
Criminal Cases, 189, 197, 221.
Licences, Transfer of, 199, 210.
Recognisance Cases, 198, 211, 223.
Roman Catholics, Exclusion from Juries, 177, 193, 202, 214, 216, 219.
"Stand-bys";Method of Selecting Juries, 183, 200, 202.
Legge, Col. H. [St. George's, Hanover Square]
Ballincollig Barracks, Condition of May 24, 1173.
Colonies, Inviting Colonies to raise Regular Corps for Service in Imperial Army, May 20, 583.
Leitrim
Agrarian Offences;Case of Daniel McGoobao, Dismissal of Sergeant Sheridan
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 59.
Leng, Sir J. [Dundee]
Ascension Day;Sittings of Committee, May 15, 174.
Canada;Live Cattle Trade with England, Embargo on, May 20, 592.
Education Department Report;Supplying to Educational Authorities in Scotland, May 14, 55.
Income Tax Collection in Scotland, June 7, 1354.
India;Light Railway Schemes, Co-operation of Local Capitalists, Ganjam District Scheme, etc., May 23, 957.
Private Bill Procedure (Scotland);Communicating Proceedings to the House, May 14, 54.
Public Houses, Hours of Closing (Scotland) Act, 1887;Extending to all Places, proposed, May 21, 776.
Levy, Mr. M. [Leicestershire, Lough-borough]
Invalided Soldiers' Pensions and Allow ances;Number increased since Mar 18, etc., May 21, 763.
Lewis, Mr. H. [Flint Boroughs]
Denominational Schools, Subscriptions to;Return, Publication of, June 6, 1215.
Forestry, Instruction in;Number of Students, etc., May 14, 53.
Income Tax;Rebatement Claims, Legal Assistance for Persons appearing before the Commissioners, Election of Commissioners, etc., June 7, 1335, 1347.
India;Forests, State Forests, Revenue, June 7, 1322.
Patent Acts;Committee of Inquiry, Re commendations of, Legislation proposed, May 14, 63.
Questions in the House;Placing Answers in the Library, Expediting "Hansard" Reports, etc., proposed, June 7, 1331.
Supply Procedure;Reports of Supply, Stating on "Orders of the Day" particular Votes to be reported, May 14, 63, 64.
Transport of Horses to South Africa;Fittings on Transports, Government Regulations, June 6, 1227, 1241.
Transport;Demurrage on Hired Transports, June 7, 1319.
Lewis, Island of
Congested Districts Board;Delay in making arrangements, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 24, 1120.
Licensing Acts Amendment (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, May 16, 234.
Licensing Bill
Petition, June 10, 1445.
Licensing Boards Bill
Title altered to Licensing Sessions Bill.
Licensing Sessions Bill
l. 2R. * May 14, 11.
com. May 17, 415.
Licensing Sessions Bill
Debate in Committee [Lords], May 14, 11; May 17, 415.
Amendment of Title, May 17, 421.
Board of Licensing Appeal, Establishment of, May 14, 13, 17, 22, 24.
Clerks to Justices
Disqualification of, May 17, 417.
Solicitors conducting applications for Licences;Penalty, May 17, 420.
Compensation for Licence-holders, May 14, 16, 20, 23.
Constitution of Licensing Boards, May 14, 12, 16, 17, 24.
Representative Element on Licensing Boards, May 14, 12, 19, 21, 22.
Government Bill Proposed;Report of Royal Commission, etc., May 14, 25, 26, 29, 34.
Justices, Disqualification of, May 17, 416.
King's Speech;Temperance Reform Proposal, May 14, 31, 32, 33.
Scotland, Application of the Bill to, May 14, 18, 19, 22.
Watch Committee, Inclusion under the Bill, May 17, 418, 419.
Light Dues
Levying;Draft Order in Council altering Scale or Rules and Exemptions, Presented, May 20, 541, 578.
Light Railways
India, see that title;Railways.
Lights and Lighthouses, Ireland
Commissioners' Clerks;Proposed Increase of Pay for second-class Clerks
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 24, 1128.
Limerick
Butter Substitutes;Butter sold in Pyramid Boxes, etc.
Qs. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; As. Mr. Hanbury, Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 60.
Post Office;Case of T. Liston, Rural Postman, Reduction of Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 10, 1472.
Land Purchase;Guarantee Fund under Act of 1891, Amount Allocated to Limerick, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 780.
Lindley
see South African War.
Linl thgow
Procurator Fiscal;Appointment of Mr. John Main
Q. Mr. J. Wilson; A. Mr. Dickson, May 14, 53.
Liquor Traffic and Liquor Licensing Laws
Drunkenness, Ireland, Arrests, Number, etc.;Return Ordered, May 16, 236; June 6, 1213.
Public Houses Hours of Closing (Scotland) Act, 1887;Extension of
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 21, 776.
Liquor Traffic Local Veto (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, May 22, 882; June 6, 1211.
ston, T.
Limerick Rural Postman;Reduction of Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1472.
Live Stock
see Cattle and Live Stock.
Liverpool
Population Estimate;Mistakes in Report of Registrar-General, Representations of Local Authorities, etc.
Q. Mr. Warr; A. Mr. Long, May 23, 963.
Llandrindod Wells Urban District Council Water Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
Lloyd-George. Mr. D. [Carnarvon, etc.]
Cordite;Price, Machinery for Making, etc., June 6, 1289.
Horses for the Army, Purchase of;Reason for Reduction in Estimate, June 6, 1274, 1275.
Income Tax Commissioners, Mode of Appointing, June 7, 1339.
South African War;Condition of Refuge Camps, Mortality among Children, etc., May 24, 1179, 1195.
Local Authorities' Officers' Superannuation Bill
Petitions, May 14, 42; May 16, 234; May 17, 439; May 21, 758; May 22, 882; June 6, 1211; June 10, 1452.
Local Government Board
President;Rt. Hon. W. H. Long.
Parliamentary Secretary;Mr. J. Grant Lawson.
Inquiries;Petitions for Alteration of Law, May 20, 576.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 3) Bill
c. Report. * May 17, 437.
3R. * May 20, 573.
l. 1R. * May 21, 755.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 4) Bill
c. 2R. * May 21, 757.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 5) Bill
c. 2R. * May 21, 757.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 6) Bill
c. 2R. * May 22, 881.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 7) Bill
c. 2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 8) Bill
c. 2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 9) Bill
c. 2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 10) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 38.
2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Order (No. 11) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 38.
2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 12) Bill
c. 1R. * May 15, 172.
2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (No. 2) Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 947.
Con. * May 24, 1104.
3R. * June 6, 1210; June 7, 1311.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1440.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (No. 3) Bill
c. 2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (No. 5) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 39.
2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Order (Gas) Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 947.
3R. * May 24, 1104.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1440.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 38.
2R. * May 24, 1104.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of the Working Classes) (Ireland) Bill
c. 2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Order (Housing of Working Classes) (Ireland) (No. 2) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 39.
2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government Provisional Order (Port) Bill
c. 1R. * May 17, 436.
2R. * June 10, 1451.
Local Government (Scotland) Act (1894) Amendment Bill
Petitions May 16, 235.
Local Records
Preservation of;Report of Treasury Committee, etc.
Q. Mr. Bull; A. Mr. A. J, Balfour, May 20, 608.
Local Taxation
Grants-in-aid
Aid from Imperial Sources in 1900, etc. Q. Mr. Ashton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 453.
Reference to, in Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 617, 644, 656, 674, 675, 688; May 21, 798; May 23, 1096.
Doles;Agricultural Rating Act, see that title.
Exemption from Rates
Burial Grounds, Exemption from Rates Bill, see that title.
Hospitals (Exemption from Rates) Bill, see that title.
Ireland;Valuation of Property, see Ireland.
Royal Commission;Report
Q. Sir H. Fowler; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 10, 1474.
Loch Leven Water Power Bill
c. 1R. * May 24, 1103.
2R* June 7, 1311.
Lockwood, Col. A. [Essex, Epping]
City of London Police;Commissioner acting independently of Home Office, June 10, 1464.
House of Commons;Refreshment Arrangements for late Sittings, May 20, 599.
Locomotives
American Locomotives for Indian Railways, Defects, etc., see India;Railways.
Lombardy
Trade Report Presented, May 17, 400.
London
Administrative County of;Classification in Census and Statistical Returns
Q. Mr. H. Hobhouse; A. Mr. Long, May 23, 964.
Charitable Endowments;Further Return Presented, May 23, 950.
London, Bishop of
Betting;Inquiry, Motion for Select Committee, May 20, 550.
London Bridge Widening Bill
l. Report, * May 17, 398.
3R. * June 10, 1438.
London Brighton and South Coast Railway Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 398.
c. 1R. * May 20, 576.
London (City) School for Orphans of Freemen Bill
c. 2R. * May 20, 573.
London County Council
Duration of Speeches
O. Maj. Rasch, May 14, 132.
Returns relating to the Council with Estimates of Expenditure for 1991, Presented June 6, 1213.
Stepney and Poplar Roads, Maintenance of
Q. Mr. H. Samuel; A. Mr. Long, May 21, 775.
don County Council (General Powers) Bill
c. 3R. * May 16, 233.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
London County Council (Money) Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
3R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
London County Council (Spitalfields Market) Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
2R. * June 10, 1438.
London County Council (Tramways and Street Widenings) Bill
c. Report, * May 20, 574.
Con. * June 6, 1209.
3R. * June 10, 1450.
London Irish Volunteers
O'Sullivan, Case of;Resignation, Fines Imposed, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 21, 766.
London Riverside Fish Market Bill
c. 3R* May 16, 233.
l. 1R* May 17, 399.
London United Tramways Bill
Instruction to Committee, Motion (Mr. Bigwood), May 15, 169.
London Water Supply
Government Proposals, Charges;Discontinuing Increased Rent for Increased Rates, etc.
Q. Mr. F. Ridley; A. Mr. Long, June 10, 1465.
London and India Docks (New Works) Bill
c. Report * May 23, 948.
Con. * June 10, 1450.
London and North-Western Railway Company
Cycles, Conveyance of;Compensation for Damage Refused
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 24, 1119.
Londonderry
Crown Appointments, Legal and Judicial, Roman Catholics holding, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 268.
Long, Rt. Hon. W.;President of the Local Government Board [Bristol S.]
Building Bye-laws, Revision of Rural and Urban Bye-laws by Local Government Board, May 14, 52.
Census
Enumerators, Payment of, May 16, 258.
Liverpool Population Estimate;Mistakes in Report of Registrar-General, etc., May 23, 964.
London Administrative County of;Classification, May 23, 964.
Coal Mining Statistics;Method of Calculating estimated number of Persons employed, May 23, 965.
Ice Creams, Sale of, in London Streets;Deaths from Ptomaine Poisoning, May 20, 593.
London Water Supply;Government Proposals
Charges, Discontinuing increased rent for increased Rates, proposed, June 10, 1466.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., May 15, 231.
Stepney and Poplar Main Roads, Maintenance of;London County Council repudiating Liability, May 21, 776.
Tuberculosis;Condemnation of Carcases Statement of late Officer of Health for London, May 23, 965.
Long Eaton Gas Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 722.
Longford, County of Longford, etc.
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Retirement Regulations, Recruiting, etc.
Qs. Mr. J. P. Farrell, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 270.
Labourers' Cottages
District Council Scheme, Erection of additional Houses, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 602.
Refusal of Applications for
Qs. Mr. J. P. Farrell; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 272.
Land Purchase;Number of Applications for Loans, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 601.
Postal Service Improvements
Qs. Mr. J. P. Farrell; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 62.
Lord Advocate for Scotland
Rt. Hon. A. G. Murray.
Lord Chancellor
Earl of Hanbury.
Lord Chancellor of Ireland
Lord Ashbourne.
Lord Chief Justice of England
Baron Alverstone.
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
Earl Cadogan.
Lord President of the Council
see Privy Council.
Lough, Mr. T. [Islington, W.]
Cycles, Conveyance on Railways;Compensation for Damage refused, May 24, 1119.
Finance Bill, 2R. May 23, 1051.
Gold Coast;Labour Ordinance of 1893, Amendments proposed, June 10, 1464.
Income Tax;Payment in advance in Scotland;Joint Stock Companies;Illicit Distillation Seizures, etc., June 7, 1339, 1343, 1346.
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Committee of Inquiry, proposed, June 10, 1567.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1478.
Classification of Sugar in Board of Trade Returns, May 16, 251.
Glucose, Duty on, June 10, 1464.
Louth
Trawling;Re-enacting Disallowed Bye-Law
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 21, 781.
Lovat, Lord
Army Reform;Training of Officers, Maps in South Africa, Mismanagement of Railways and Remount Department, May 21, 742.
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James [Kent, Thanet]
Canada;Subsidised Steamship Service between Canadian and French Port, May 20, 588.
Coal Tax;Mining Association of Great Britain, Resolution, May 20, 590.
Demise of the Crown Bill, May 24, 1140, 1141.
Finance Bill, 2R. May 23, 1070.
Lowther, Rt. Hon. J. W.;Chairman of Committees [Cumberland, Penrith]
Duties of the Chairman were not to save the time of the House, but to see that the Rules were observed, May 17, 466.
Hamilton Burgh Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, con., May 24, 1103.
Irrelevant Observations
Demise of the Crown Bill, May 24, 1142.
Ways and Means, Sugar Duty Debate, June 10, 1486.
London United Tramways Bill;Instructions to Committee, May 15, 169.
Supply
Discussing Items which had already passed on a Motion to reduce the Vote, June 6, 1278.
Discussing Subjects which should be raised on other Votes, May 17, 514; June 6, 1273, 1281, 1282, 1284, 1286, 1287, 1288, 1289, 1294, 1296.
Going back on an Item upon which the Committee had pronounced an opinion, May 17, 477.
Irrelevant Observations, June 6, 1239, 1278.
Motions for Reductions exceeding Amount of Vote# asked for, May 17, 508, 510.
Loyd, Mr. A. K. [Berks, Abingdon]
Deficiency and Ways and Means Advances, Bank Interest on, May 24, 1116.
Education Bill;Effect of Repeal Clause on Irish Technical Education, May 17, 460.
Ludgate Hill Station
Improvements, Delay in making
Debate (Lords) on South Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railway Bill, May 14, 3.
Lunacy
Number of Visits made, Patients seen, etc.;Report Presented, May 14, 10.
Lunacy Commission, England
Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 504.
Lunacy (Ireland) Bill
l. Report, * May 21, 725.
Lunatic Asylums Ireland
Cavan and Monaghan, Expenditure on;Inquiry
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 266.
County Council providing Auxiliary Asylum independently of other Councils in District
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1469.
Sligo Asylum, see that title.
Lundon, Mr. W. [Limerick, E.]
Civil Service Staff Clerk, Upper Division, Definition of, May 16, 264.
Kilmallock Petty Sessions House;Refusing Use of Court to District Council, May 21, 779.
Land Act, 1896;Section 40, Legislation proposed, May 20, 603.
Limerick County, Land Purchase in;Guarantee Fund of 1891, Amount allocated to Limerick, etc., May 21, 780.
Road Maintenance in Ireland;Order in Council, May 24, 1126.
Lynton and Barnstaple Railway Bill
l. 3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
M
Macartney, Rt. Hon. W. E. [Antrim, S.]
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill 2R., May 22, 899.
Land Judge's Court;Receivers' Department, Payment of Staff Expenses, etc., May 16, 275.
MacDonnell, Dr. M. A. [Queen's County, Leix]
Newtown District, Queen's Co.;Delay in Delivery of Letters, May 23, 986.
MacNeill, Mr. S. [Donegal, S.]
Army
Garrison Reserve Regiments, Royal;Selection of Officers, etc, May 14, 50.
Medical Officers;Eligibility of Re-employed Reserve Medical Officers for Promotion, etc., May 14, 49.
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Re-armament, etc., May 14, 58; May 16, 268.
South African War
Australian Contingents;Hospital Treatment, Complaints, May 14, 47.
Boer Prisoners, Treatment of, previous to landing in St. Helena, May 14, 48.
Casualty Lists, Inclusion of Temporary Losses by Capture in, etc., May 16, 239.
Graves of Soldiers at Spion Kop, Neglected Condition of, alleged, May 16, 239.
Roberts, Lord, Plot to Kidnap;Police Agent Gano's connection with, etc., May 14, 47.
Transport Service;"Tagus," Disembarkation of Troops at Gosport, Complaints as to Commissariat Arrangements, May 16, 240.
Uitlander Refugees Committee;Protest against Detention of Refugees in Cape Town, etc., May 16, 238.
Mail Service
Skye;Proposed Steamer Service between Mallaig and West Coast of Skye
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 10, 1466.
Stornoway, see that title.
Main, Mr. J.
Linlithgow Prosecutor Fiscal, Appointment as
Q. Mr. J. Wilson; A. Mr. Dickson, May 14, 53.
Malcolm, Mr. I. Z. [Suffolk, Stowmarket]
Cretan Campaign Medal;Allowing Troops to wear, June 10, 1461.
House of Commons;Refreshment arrangements for late Sittings, May 20, 599.
Newfoundland, Bond-Blaine Convention, Renewal of;Negotiations with United States, June 10, 1462.
Mallaig
Mail Service to Skye, see Skye.
Mallararmy
Cattle Market;Mr. Stoney collecting Tolls and Customs, Providing Weighing Machine, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1470.
Mallow
Conference on Agricultural Instruction, Provision for Agricultural Instruction in Munster
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 600.
Labourers Acts, Arbitration under;Appointment of Arbitrator, refusal of Local Government Board to appoint Mr. J. Byrne
Qs. Mr. W. Abraham, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 56.
Malta
Barrack Accommodation
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1165, 1199.
Garrison Battalions, Royal;Consulting Government of Malta
Q. Mr. C. Hobhouse; A. Lord Stanley May 20, 585.
Language Question
Correspondence relating to;Laying on the Table
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 20, 589.
Meeting in Malta on May 5th, Report of, etc.
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1116.
Manchester Corporation Bill
l. 3R. * May 14, 3.
c. 1R. * May 17, 439.
2R. * June 6, 1210.
Manchester and Liverpool Electric Express Railway Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 21, 722.
Manning
see Merchant Shipping.
Mansfield Corporation Bill
c. 3R. * May 17, 435.
l. 1R. * May 20, 535.
Manual Industries
India, see that title.
Maple, Sir J. B. [Camberwell, Dulwich]
Army Horses;Purchase in Austro-Hungary. Corruption of British Officers alleged, June 6, 1246, 1249, 1254.
South African War, Transport Service;Cost of bringing horses back from South Africa, June 6, 1233, 1238, 1242.
Maps
South African War, see that title.
Marines
China, Service in;Promotion of Majors in Royal Light Infantry
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 14, 51.
Coaling Sections garrisoning with Marines;Attitude of the Defence Committee
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 244.
Commissions from the Ranks;Ineligibility for Appointments of Barrack-master and Paymaster
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 14, 51.
Marlborough, Duke of
Battle of Blenheim, Account of, Written on the back of a carefully revised Washing Bill
Os. Sir E. Vincent, May 20, 660; Mr. Labouchere, 662.
Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister Bill
Moving the Adjournment of the House to a date posterior to that fixed for Committee Stage
Qs. Sir B. Gurdon; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 16, 275.
Petitions, May 17, 439; June 6, 1211; June 10, 1452.
References to, in Debate on the Whitsuntide Adjournment Motion, May 23, 990, 1000, 1002.
Marriages Legalistion Bill
l. Report, * May 14, 10; May 17, 421.
3R. * May 20, 572.
Masterson, P.
Gun Licence refusal
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1470.
Mather, Mr. W. [Lancashire, Rossendale]
War Office Organisation;Report of Committee, Opportunity for Discussion, June 10, 1473.
Maxwell, Capt.
Passage Home from South Africa;Refunding Cost of Passage, proposed
Q. Col. Welby; A. Lord Stanley, May 24, 1113.
Mayo
Huts, Demolition of
O. Mr. C. O'Kelly, May 23, 1011.
Mayo, Earl of
Habitual Drunkards' Bill, Com., May 17 402.
McArthur, Mr. C. [Liverpool, Exchange]
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, invasion of Private Members' Rights, etc., May 23, 993.
Church Discipline Bill;Affording Special Facilities for Debate, May 20, 610.
Humber Commercial Railway and Dock Bill, Con., June 10, 1447.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1486.
Molasses for Cattle Feeding;Reduction of Duty proposed, May 16, 250.
McCalmont, Col, J. [Antrim, E.]
Rabies in Ireland;Importation of Irish Dogs into Great Britain. Relaxing Prohibition, etc., May 16, 275.
M'Clung, Mr.
Clerk at Galway Gaol;Attendance at Street Preaching, Removal to Dublin, etc.,
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 978.
M'Crae, Mr. G. [Edinburgh, E.]
Finance;Interest on Deficiency Borrowings, May 20, 589.
Finance Bill, 2R. May 23, 684.
Taxation;Collections in England and Scotland, Delay in collecting Taxes in England, May 23, 961.
M'Dermott Mr. P. [Kilkenny, N.]
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Retirement on Pension. Powers of Inspector-General to compel Constables to retire, May 23, 979.
Firearms, Regulating use of;Death of W. Dodd, May 20, 591.
McGoohan, Daniel
Conviction for Agrarian Offence;Dismissal of Sergeant Sheridan from Royal Irish Constabulary.
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 59.
McGovern, Mr. T. [Cavan, W.]
Belfast Surveyor of Taxes Office, Chief Clerk in;Placing on Permanent Staff of Civil Service proposed, May 24, 1121.
Cavan Co.
Number of Fair Rent Appeals, etc., May 23, 980.
Prison;Handing over to Military Authorities, May 21, 778.
Finlay's Estate;Sale of Land to Tenants. Delays, May 23, 982; May 24, 1124.
M'Guinness, R.
Prosecution of;Knocallassa Grazing Farm Disturbance
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 604.
McKenna, Mr. R. [Monmouth, N.]
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, Invasion of Private Members' Rights, May 23, 1004.
Civil List Bill, Com., June 10, 1520, 1522.
Coal Mining Statistics;Estimate of number of Persons employed, May 23, 965.
Finance Bill, 2R. May 20, 680; May 21, 806.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Committee, Resignation of Member, June 7, 1333.
Irvine, Dr. H. W., Appointment of, as Inspector of Schools at Birmingham. May 23, 1036, 1040.
Telegrams, Misdirected;Postmaster giving Information respecting Telegrams, Case at Grosmont, May 21, 777.
Transport Service-Demurrage, Payments for, June 6, 1233
Medals
Artistic Work at the Mint, Responsibility for Designs, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 508.
Cretan Campaign Medal, Allowing Troops to wear
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 10, 1461.
Medical Council
Irvine, Dr. H. W.;Appointment as Inspector of Schools for Birmingham
Os. Mr. M'Kenna, May 23, 1036; Mr. J. Chamberlain, 1038; Sir W. Foster, 1042; Sir J. Gorst 1047.
Mercantile Marine Fund Act
Draft Order in Council altering scale or Rules in Exemptions Presented, May 20, 541, 578.
Merchant Shipping
"Assyrian," Wreck of;Nationality of Crew, Inquiry proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, June 10, 1460.
Manning of Ships
Able-bodied Seamen, Proof of Service, see Seamen.
Committee on Manning, Recommendations of
Qs. Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. G. W. Balfour, May 16, 255.
Inefficient Manning;Number of Inefficiently Manned Ships lost in the last Twenty years
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, May 16, 253.
Regulations defining proper Manning, Proportions of proved A. B.'s
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, May 21, 772.
"Moel Tryran," Loss of;Finding of Court of Inquiry, etc.
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, May 16, 256.
Navigation and Shipping;Annual Statement Presented, May 16, 236; May 17, 400.
Pilotage Funds of Liverpool District;Order in Council approving Bye-laws, Presented, June 10, 1444, 1454.
Quaratine Regulations, see Names of Ports.
"Runic," s.s.;Case of Seaman Dean, etc. Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, May 20, 591.
Shipbuilding, Bounties on;Reports from H. M. Representatives Abroad Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
Sight Test;Report Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
Steamship Subsidies, see that title.
Suez Canal, Shipping and Tonnage;Returns Presented June 6, 1212.
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board
Pilotage Funds of Liverpool District;Order in Council approving Bye-laws, Presented, June 10, 1444, 1454.
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board Bill
c. 2R. * June 6, 1210.
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board (Canada Dock Works, etc. Bill
c. 2R. * June 6, 1210.
Metric System
Use of;Report of Consul of La Rochelle Q. Mr. Brigg; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 988.
Q. Mr. Labouchere; A. Mr. G. W, Balfour, June 7, 1327.
Metropolitan Common Scheme (Orpington) Provisional Order Bill
c. Report. * May 23, 947.
Con. * May 24, 1104.
3R. * June 6, 1210.
1R. * June 10, 1440.
Metropolitan Electric Supply Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
Metropolitan Police
Dockyard Police, see Dockyards.
Metropolitan Police, Dublin
see Dublin.
Metropolitan Police Provisional Order Bill
l. 2R. * May 20, 540.
Metropolitan Railway Bill
c. Report, * May 21, 757.
3R. * June 10, 1450.
Metropolitan Water Companies (Amendment of Acts) Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
3R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Meysey Thompson, Sir H. (Stafford, Handsworth]
Army Horses, Weights carried by, June 6, 1265.
Midland Railway Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 17, 398.
Report * May 21, 722.
Mildmay, Mr. F. B. [Devon, Totnes]
Horses, Treatment of in South Africa, June 6, 1259.
Milford Docks Bill
c. 2R* May 20, 573.
Military Expenditure
see Army;Expenditure.
Military Instruction (Schools and Cadets) Bill
l. com. May 14, 11.
Military Lands Provisional Orders Bill
l. 1R* May 14, 10.
2R* May 21, 724.
Military Lands Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
c. Intro. and 1R. * May 23, 946.
Military Requirements of the Empire
Debate on the Finance Bill, May 20, 646; May 21, 795.
"Vulnerable and scattered character of the Empire and the Universality of our Commerce," Lord R. Churchill's Letter
Os. Lord Stanley, May 14, 95, 107; Sir J. Colomb, 106.
Military Savings Banks
Statement Presented, June 7, 1314.
Militia
Competitive Examination, Date of;Number of Commissions offered, etc.
Q. Major Rasch; A. Lord Stanley, June 10, 1461.
Disembodiment;Method of ascertaining wishes of embodied Battalions
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 585.
Officers
Garrison Reserve Regiments;Militia Officers as Lieutenants, etc.
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 50.
Night Schools of Instruction, Instituting at the Tower, proposed
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Lord Stanley, May 24, 1115.
Training;Pass School Certificates, Local Instruction for
Q. Mr. Partington; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 244.
Pay, Training, etc.
References to, in Debate on Army Reorganisation Proposals, May 14 105.
Recruits, Number of, Jan.-May, 1900 and 1901
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 50.
South African War, see that title.
Training Establishments;Return Presented, May 21, 760.
Wicklow Artillery Militia;Training at Cork
Q. Mr. Cogan; A. Lord Stanley May 24, 1115.
Milk
Boracic Acid in, see Butter Adulteration
Fixing Standard for Milk
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Banbury, May 24, 1118, 1119; Q. Mr. Strachey; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 7, 1326.
Milward, Col. V. [Warwick, Stratford-upon-Avon]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 826.
Museums, Sunday opening;Engagement of Officials, May 23, 975.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill
Petitions, May 14, 42; May 16, 235; May 17, 439; May 20, 576; June 6, 1211; June 7, 1312; June 10, 1452.
Ministers of the Crown
Vacation of Office on Demise of the Crown;Demise of the Crown Bill, see that title.
Mint
Artistic Work, Responsibility for Designs, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 508.
Chemist and Assayer;Reduction of Salaries, proposed
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 504.
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 504.
Silver Coin;Loss on worn Coin withdrawn from Circulation
Os. Mr. Taylor, May 17, 508; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 509.
Mitchell, Mr. W. [Burnley]
Commercial Law, Codification, May 24, 1119.
Mitchelstown Union
Labourers' Cottages;Delay in Progress of Schemes
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1123:
"Moel Tryran"
Loss of;Finding of Court of Inquiry, etc. Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 16, 256.
Molasses
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposals
Alteration of Duty on Molasses Beach's, Sir M. H., Supplementary Statement, June 10, 1475.
Reduction of Duty on Molasses for Feeding Cattle
Q. Mr. C. McArthur; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 250.
Monaghan
Cavan and Monaghan Lunatic Asylum, Expenditure on;Inquiry
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 266.
Fair Kent Appeals, Limitation;Mr. Justice Meredith's Comments
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 267.
Postal Arrangements;Tri-weekly Delivery of Letters at Swan's Cross
Q. Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 24, 1122.
Mond Gas Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
Con.* May 24, 1103.
3R. * June 7, 1311.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1438.
Money Orders
Charges for;High Charges, etc.
O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 10, 1560.
(see also Postal Orders.)
Monkswell, Lord
Education of Soldiers for Civil Life Motion, May 20, 556.
South Eastern and London Chatham and Dover Railways Bill, 3R., May 14, 3, 8.
Montagu, Mr. J. Scott [Hants, New Forest]
Motor Cycles for Military Purposes, June 6, 1261.
Mont eagle of Brandon, Lord
Habitual Drunkards Bill, Com., May 17, 403.
Moon, Mr. E R. P. [St, Pancras, N.]
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1394.
Mooney, Mr. J. J. [Dublin Co., S.]
Analyst, Government;Appointment proposed, May 16, 265.
Census Enumerators;Cost in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland respectively, May 16, 258.
Great Southern and Western Railway Company;Through Rates for Irish Produce, etc., May 17, 458.
Moore, Mr. W. [Antrim, N.]
Cambridge University, Number Volunteering for Active Service;Otter of Commissions, etc., May 24, 1108.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 191.
Sligo Asylum;Case of Attendant Gaffney May 24, 1122.
Morea
British Goods Importation
Q. Mr. Brigg; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 17, 447.
Morgan, Mr. D. [Essex, Walthamstow]
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1381.
Morgan, Mr. L. [Carmarthen, W.]
Agricultural Labour Contracts, Breach of;Amendment of Statute of Frauds,. May 17, 453.
Colliery Disaster at Senghenydd, May 24, 1118.
Morley, Earl of;Chairman of Committees
Private Bill Procedure (Scotland) Act, Opposition in the House of Lords, Interval between first and third Readings;Ardrossan Harbour Order Confirmation Bill, May 20, 536.
South Eastern and London, Chatham, and Dover Railway Bill, 3R., May 14, 6.
Morley, Rt. Hon. J. [Montrose Burghs]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 23, 1075.
Trade Report Presented, May 21, 725.
Morony, D.
Case of;Proposed Mitigation of Sentence Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 980.
Morrell, Mr. J. H. [Oxon, Woodstock]
Education;Code of 1901, Cottage Gardening and Cookery, Lowering Age for Grants, etc., proposed, May 20, 595.
Morris, Lord
Solicitors' Bill, Com., May 14, 33.
Morton, Mr. E. J. C. [Devonport]
Army Guns, Purchase of Field Guns in Germany;Votes in Supply, June 7, 1321.
Civil List Bill, Com., June 10, 1502.
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 808; May 23, 1059.
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers, Accommodation for, June 7, 1418.
Metropolitan Police;Lodging Allowance, etc., June 6, 1294.
Post Office Employees' Grievances, June 7, 1362, 1379.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1485.
Moss, Mr. S. [Denbighshire, E.]
Gold Mines in Wales;Royalties, May 23, 962, 963.
Transvaal;Gold Production 1897&#x2013;99, May 23, 956.
Motor Cars
Army Remounts, Motor-Cars v Horses Os. Mr. Sinclair, June 6, 1248; Lord Stanley, 1254; Mr. Scott Montagu, 1261.
Mount Pleasant Sorting Office
Medical Officer, Appointment proposed, etc.
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 6, 1216.
Mozambique
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Municipal Trading
Committee, Re-appointment of
Q. Mr. Kimber; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 609.
Munster
Agricultural Instruction, Provision for;Mallow Conference
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 600.
Murphy, Mr. J. [Kerry, E.]
Firies Postal Deliveries;Reply to Inquiry, June 7, 1330.
Herbert Estate Conference;Police Attendance, June 10, 1469.
Kerry, Representative on Congested Districts Board, proposed;Moving Bog, June 7, 1329.
Killarney House;Police Protection, June 10, 1468.
Murray, Mr. A. W. C. O.
see Elibank, Master of.
Murray, Rt. Hon. A. G.;Lord Advocate [Buteshire]
Afforestation;Experiments in Highlands and Islands, May 24, 1120.
Allotments and Common Pastures;Proceedings of Parish and County Councils, Return, May 24, 1120.
Ardrossan Harbour Order Confirmation Bill, Con., May 15, 170.
Badluachrach, Road Construction at;Application for Grant, May 23, 969.
Berwickshire County Town Bill, 2R., June 10, 1547, 1548.
Cava, Island of;Charges borne by Parish of Orphir in respect of Island, etc., May 17, 454.
Census
Enumerators' Pay;Delays, etc., May 20, 599.
Population of Scotland, May 20, 598.
Congested Districts Board;Congestion in Highlands, Delay in taking steps to provide Land, etc., May 24, 1121; June 7, 1327.
Death Certificates;Legislation, May 16, 259.
Edinburgh;Sasine Office, System of Registration, Search Sheet, etc., May 23, 969.
Education
Board Schools;Prizes from School Funds;Providing Prizes for Denominational Schools, proposed, May 23, 968.
Children leaving School;Returns as to Number reaching age of fourteen, Number obtaining Labour and Merit Certificates, May 16, 260.
Continuation Classes;Powers of County Technical Instruction Committees, May 21, 776.
Fee Grants in State aided Schools in 1900 and 1901, etc., May 16, 260.
Hamilton Burgh Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, con., June 10, 1448, 1449.
Public-houses, Hours of Closing Act, 1887;Extending to all Places, proposed, May 21, 776.
Uist, South;Crofters and Cottars threatening to take possession of Farm of Bornish, etc, May 23, 970.
Secretary for Scotland;Visit to Congested Districts in Western Islands, proposed. May 23, 971.
Museums
Sunday Opening, Conditions of;Engagement of Officials
Q. Col. Milward; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 975.
N
Nannetti, Mr. J. P. [Dublin, College Green]
Dublin
Barracks Contract, Employment of Boy Labour, Terms of Fair Wage Resolution, etc, May 24, 1172.
Inns Quay Post Office, Closing of, etc, May 20, 606.
Marlborough Street Stores;Bookbinders' Society's Complaint, etc., May 16, 273.
Post Office Telephone Operators;Female Operators, proposed Increase of Salary, May 23, 984.
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1394.
"Runic," s.s.;Case of Seaman Dean, May 20, 591.
Volunteers
Irish Volunteers drilling with Regulars in Dublin;Expenses incurred, etc., June 10, 1461.
London Irish Volunteers;Resignation of O'Sullivan, Fines imposed, May 21, 766.
Natal
British Indian Subjects;Allowing Refugees to return to the Transvaal
Q. Sir M. Bhownaggree; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 14, 45.
National Debt
Funded and Unfunded Debt, Difference between, etc.
Os. Mr. Morton, May 23, 1066; Sir M. H. Beach, 1067.
Proportion between Debt and Taxation;War Expenditure, Mode of Payment
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 625; May 21, 807; May 23, 1065.
Sinking Fund;Account Presented,June 6, 1214.
National Debt Office
Comptroller-General's Salary, Number of Clerks, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 513.
Payment to the Bank of England and Bank of Ireland as Agents
Os. Mr. J. P. Farrell, May 17, 515; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 518.
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 517.
Temporary Pensioner Messenger Appointment
Os. Mr. J. P. Farrell, May 17, 514; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 518.
National Gallery
Fire, Precautions against;Acquisition of adjacent Land, etc.
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Mr. A. Douglas, May 17, 454.
National School Teachers, Ireland.
Pension Fund;Accounts of Receipts and Payments Presented, June 6, 1214; June 10, 1445.
Salaries
District No. 46. Teacher No. 8, 316;Detention of Salary, Non-Provision of Out Offices
Q. Mr. K. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 780.
Teachers Examined before Mar. 1901 Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 273.
Naturalization
see Aliens.
Naval Works Bill
Gibraltar Harbour Works
Q. Mr. G. Bowles; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 24, 1132.
Naval Works Provisional Order Bill
c. 1R. * May 21, 757.
Navigation
Annual Statement of Navigation and Shipping Presented, May 16, 236; May 17, 400.
Navy
First Lord;Earl of Selborne.
Secretary;Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster.
Civil Lord;Mr. E. G. Pretyman.
Cruisers, Fast Cruisers, Construction of;Russian and French Cruisers
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 23, 956.
Deptford Victualling Yard;Rum Drawers' Wages.
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 20, 587.
Expenditure, Increase in by present Administiation;Comparison with Expenditure by other Countries, etc.
Os. Col. Milward, May 21, 827; Mr. Lough, May 23, 1053.
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 620.
Gibraltar Harbour Works, see Gibraltar.
Marines, see that title.
Packers' Wages at West India Dock Naval Stores, see title West India Dock Naval Stores.
South African War;Warrant Officers and War Honours
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 17, 441.
Victualling;Report of Departmental Committee
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 21, 767.
West India Dock Naval Stores, see that title.
Neill &amp; Co., Messrs.
Government Printing Contracts;Fair Wage Regulation
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 261.
Nenagh
Stamp Distributor;Delay in Appointment
Q. Mr. P. J. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 985.
Netley Hospital
Lee, Ex-Private, Ill-treatment of, alleged Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 49.
New Member Affirmed
Pease, Mr. J. A., for County of Essex (Saffron Walden Division), June 6, 1220.
New Members Sworn
Ormsby-Gore, Mr. G. R. C., for County of Salop (Oswestry Division), June 6, 1220.
Sheehan, Mr. D., for County of Cork (Mid Cork Division), May 23, 989.
New Peers
see Parliament;House of Lords.
New Swindon Gas Bill
c. 2R. * May 20, 573.
New Writ
Warwick, County of;Stratford-on-Avon Division, June 10, 1455.
Newcastle, Bishop of
Introduced as New Peer, May 20, 533.
Newfoundland
Bond-Blaine Convention, Renewal of;Negotiations with United States
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 10, 1462.
Newport, County Mayo
Police, Number of;Number of Roman Catholics, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1471.
Newton, Lord
Turkey;Postal Service, Turkish Attempt to Abolish Foreign Post Offices, May 21, 726.
Newtown District, Queen's County
Postal Arrangements;Delay in Delivery of Letters
Q. Dr. MacDonnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 986.
Nice
Trade Report Presented, May 17, 400.
Night Schools
Instruction for Auxiliary Officers, see titles Militia and Volunteers.
Nitrate Railways Company Bill
c. 2R. * May 20, 573.
Nolan, Col J. P. [Galway, N.]
Declarations of Heads of States on Accession;Return, May 23, 988.
Postal Facilities on the West Coast of Ireland, etc., June 10, 1568.
Prayers, Form of, used in House of Commons;Persons responsible for, May 24, 1130.
Nonconformists
Trustees of Charities;Nonconformist Mayor of Winchester's Disqualification
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 483.
Norman, Mr. H. [Wolverhampton, S.]
Ammunition;Reserve of Small-arm Ammunition, May 20, 580; May 23, 1012.
Normandy
Cider Production;Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
North British Railway Bill
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
North British and Mercantile Insurance Company's Order Confirmation Bill
c. 1R. * May 22, 881.
Con. * May 23, 946.
3R. * June 6, 1210.
l. 1R. * June 10, 1440.
North Eastern Railway Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
North German Lloyd Company
Co-operation with Hamburg-American Steamship Company, German Trade Development, see China;Yang-tsze Valley.
Norton, Capt. C. W. [Newington, W.]
Army
Ammunition;Reserve of Small Arms Ammunition, Mark IV. Bullets, June 6, 1281.
Cadet Corps Commanders;Honorary Rank and Volunteer Decoration, etc., May 24, 1114.
Garrison Battalions;Cost of Married Establishment, May 14, 50.
Horses;Need for strengthening Veterinary Department, etc., June 7, 1433.
Lancers, Reserve Regiment;Canteen Fund Balance, Expenditure, June 6, 1214.
Night Schools of Instruction for Auxiliary Offices, Holding at the Tower proposed, May 24, 1115.
Private Soldiers' Pay;First Payment of One Shilling a day and Food, May 14, 51.
Recruits, Number of, Jan. May, 1900 and 1901, May 14, 50.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 366.
Legislation required, May 21, 765.
Income-Tax;Insufficient Surveyors, June 7, 1338.
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers, Accommodation, June 7, 1413, 1414.
Mount Pleasant Sorting Office;Medical Officer, Appointment proposed, etc., June 6, 1216.
Navy
Cruisers, Construction of fast Cruisers;Speed of Russian Cruiser "Varyag," etc., May 23, 956.
Deptford Victualling Yard;Rum Drawers' Wages, May 20, 587.
Dockyard Police, Lodging Allowance, Additional Pay, etc., June 6, 1291, 1293, 1294.
West India Dock Naval Stores;Packers and Pay, May 20, 586; May 21, 767.
Post Office Employees;Granting Day's Leave on May 24, May 23, 973.
South African War
Horses, Transport, Wastage;Lack of Veterinary Surgeons, etc., June 6, 1221, 1270, 1276.
Return of Troops;Number of Officers compared with Men, June 7, 1428.
Teachers;Security of Tenure, Legislation proposed, May 23, 988.
Volunteer Officers;Retirement Regulations, May 24, 1114.
War Office Organisation;Report of Committee
Opportunity for Discussion, June 10, 1473.
Postponement of Debate on Army Resolution, May 16, 245.
Norton, Lord
Licensing Boards Bill, 2R., May 14, 22.
Notting Hill Electric Lighting Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 948.
Nottingham
Postmen's Walks;Advertising Vacancies on Notice Boards, proposed
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 20, 597.
Nussey, Mr. T. W. [Pontefract]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minntes, May 14, 146.
Yeomanry, Imperial;Physical Tests for Officers, May 23, 956.
O
Oakham Water Bill
c. Report. * May 23, 948.
Con. * June 10, 1450.
Oaths
Declarations of Heads of States on Accession;Return
Delay in Presenting
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 988.
Return Presented, May 23, 950.
O'Brien, Mr. J. F. X. [Cork]
Cork Post Office
Exchange of Duties in the Telegraph Office, May 20, 607.
Provincial Clerks in Charge, May 17, 459.
O'Brien, Mr. K. [Tipperary, Mid]
National School Teachers;District No. 46, Teacher No. 8316, Detention of Salary, etc., May 21 780.
O'Brien, Mr. P. [Kilkenny]
Census;Decrease of Population in Ireland, May 20, 606.
Central Telegraph Office;Meal Reliefs May 23, 973.
Coroners' Inquests, Medical Fees;Fee paid to Dr. Synnott, May 23, 981.
Queensland, Asiatic Labour in;Prohibiting, Royal Sanction refused to Act, June 7, 1322.
Shorncliffe, Military Disturbance at, June 7, 1321.
South African War
Casualty Lists;Withholding Particulars of Battles and Dates, June 7, 1317.
Peace Negotiations with Gen. Botha, June 7, 1318.
University Education, Ireland;Commission, Names of Members, May 24, 1129; June 7, 1331.
O'Brien, Mr. P. J. [Tipperary, N.]
Nenagh Stamp Distributor;Delay in Appointment, May 23, 985.
O'Connor, Mr. J. [Wicklow, W.]
Berwickshire County Town Bill, 2R., June 10, 1550.
Bonded Warehouses;Fortifying Wine, Duty Charged, etc., May 23, 960; May 24, 1117.
Freeman, Constable in Co. Wicklow, Conviction for Assault, Removal, etc., May 24, 1124.
Industrial Schools, Boy Recruits from;Boys drafted into Army without consent of Father, June 10, 1465.
Postal Clerks' Deputation to Postmaster-General, May 23, 974.
Rathdrum Union;Labourers' Cottages Scheme;Appointment of Arbitrator, Delays, etc, May 17, 456.
O'Connor, Mr. T. P. [Liverpool, Scotland]
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers;Accommodation for, June 7, 1415, 1416.
O'Doherty, Mr. W. [Donegal, N.]
Roman Catholics holding Crown Appointments in Derry, Tyrone and Donegal, etc., May 16, 268.
O'Donnell, Mr. T. [Kerry, W.]
Census Returns;Number of Irish Speaking People in Ireland, May 17, 457.
Irish Language, Teaching of, in Irish Schools, May 21, 858.
Post Office
Irish Girl Clerks;Training in London, etc., May 23, 985.
Irish Savings Bank Accounts;Proposed Transference to Dublin, May 23, 986.
Rent Reductions in 1900;Return proposed, May 24, 1123.
O'Dowd, Mr. J. [Sligo, S.]
Achonry;Meeting, Police Interference, May 14, 57; May 16, 264.
Knocallassa Grazing Farm Disturbance;Arrest of M'Guinness, etc., May 20, 604.
Office of Works
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 531.
O'Kelly, Mr. C. [Mayo, N.]
Huts in County Mayo, Demolition of, by the Action of the Attorney-General, May 23, 1011.
Old Age Pensions Question
Os. Mr. Bryce, May 20, 716; Mr. J. Lowther, May 23, 1075.
Omagh Gas Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
Con., May 24, 1103.
3R. * June 7, 1311.
O'Mara, Mr. J. [Kilkenny, S.]
Butter Adulteration;Machines by which Water may be fraudulently added to Butter. May 16, 256.
Horses, Return of, from South Africa after the War, June 7, 1433.
National Debt Office, Duties of Broker, etc., May 17, 520.
Post Office Employees' Grievances, June 10, 1586.
Re-afforesting, Number of Acres for, May 16, 274.
Taxes, Collection of, in Ireland, Cost of Collecting;Rewards for Illicit Distillation Seizures, June 10, 1555.
Opium Trade
see India;Poppy Cultivation, etc.
Orange River Colony
Finance;Sir D. Barbour's Report Presented, June 7, 1314; June 10, 1443, 1454.
"Orders of the Day"
see Supply;Reports
Ordnance Factories
Army, see that title.
Ordnance Survey
Southampton, Assistants at;Reduction in Number, Expenses of moving, etc.
Q. Sir B. Simeon; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 7, 1325.
O'Shaughnessy, Mr. J. P. [Limerick, W.]
Butter
Foreign, Sold in Irish Pyramid boxes;Prosecutions, etc., May 14, 60.
Milk charged with Boracic Acid, Forcing into Butter by means of Spiral Machine, May 17, 452; May 21, 774.
Standards;Fixing Standard of Water, May 17, 452; May 21, 775.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 911.
Limerick Rural Postman's Grievances, June 10, 1472.
O'Shee, Mr. J. J. [Waterford, W.]
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 925.
O'Sullivan, Private
London Irish Volunteers;Resignation on account of King's Declaration,. Fines imposed, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 21, 766.
Oswestry
Parliamentary By-Election, New Member Sworn, June 6, 1220.
Otley Gas Bill
c. 2R. * June 6, 1210.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill
c. 2R., May 15, 231.
Com., June 6, 1305.
Oxford
Cowley Leper Hospital, Action of Charity Commissioners
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 499.
P
P. and O. Company
Accommodation for Seamen, see Seamen;Crew Accommodation.
Paraguay
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Paris Exhibition
Royal Commission;Report of Commissioners Presented, June 10, 1443, 1453.
Parker, Mr. Gilbert [Gravesend]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 698.
Parliament
House of Commons
Business of the House, see that title.
Duration of Speeches, see that title.
Lobbies and Corridors, Ventilation of, Q. Sir S. Crossley; A. Mr. A. Douglas, June 16, 258.
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. A. Douglas, June 10, 1467.
Members, Leave of Absence;Mr. Bignold, June 7, 1335.
New Writs and New Members sworn, see those titles
Prayers, Form of Daily Prayer, Persons Responsible for
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 24, 1130.
Questions, see that titie.
Refreshment Arrangements for Late Sittings
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Colonel Lockwood, May 20, 599.
Telegraph Department Accommodation.
Os. Mr. W. Redmond, May 17, 531; Mr. A. A. Douglas, 531.
House of Lords
New Peer;Bishop of Newcastle, introduced, May 20, 533.
Postmaster-General Sitting in, Objections to
References to in Debate in Committee of Supply, June 7, 1411; June 10, 1558, 1566, 1569, 1574 1576, 1583.
Representative Peers for Ireland;Earl of Arran, May 14, 1; May 17, 397.
Sat First;Lord Sudley, after the death of his father, May 21, 721.
Took the Oath
Chester, Bishop of, May 20, 572.
Durham, Bishop of, May 21, 721.
Whitsuntide Recess;see that title.
Parliamentary Control
Supply, see that title;Procedure.
"Parliamentary Debates"
Expediting Publication;Placing answers to questions in the Library proposed
Qs. Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. Schwann, Mr. C. Grant; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 7, 1331.
Parliamentary Pressure
Post Office Employees' Grievances
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1382, 1383, 1387, 1394, 1397; June 10, 1565.
Parliamentary Procedure
Notice of Motion on the Paper;Discussing Subject embodied in Motion on a Motion for the Adjournment of the House for Recess
Os. Mr. J. Redmond, May 23, 1011; Mr. Dillon, 1012; Mr. Speaker, 1012.
"Orders of the Day";Reports of Supply, Stating Votes to be taken on a Particular Day
Qs. Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. J. Ellis, Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 14, 63.
Private Bill Procedure, Scotland, see that title.
Questions, see that title.
Raising Questions without Notice in Committee of Supply, Inconvenience to the House
Os. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 1183; Lord E. Fitzmaurice, 1188; Mr. S. Wortley, 1190.
Supply, see that title, also Army Estimates.
Parliamentary Time
Distribution of
Debate on Duration of Speeches in Parliament, May 14, 127.
Partington, Mr. O. [Derbyshire, High Peak]
Militia and Volunteer Officers' Pass School Certificates, Local Instruction for, May 16, 244.
South African War;Lichtenburg Garrison, Relief of, May 16, 241.
Patagonia
Welsh Settlement;Report of Chaplain of H. M. S. "Flora,"
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1116.
Patent Acts
Committee of Inquiry, Recommendations of;Legislation proposed
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 14, 63.
Peace Negotiations
see South African War.
Pease, Sir J. [Durham, Barnard Castle]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 809, 815.
Peel, Mr. W. R. W. [Manchester, S.]
Yeomanry, Imperial;Mounted Infantry, Training as;Equipment, May 24, 1110, 1111.
Peel, Visc.
Licensing Boards Bill, 2R., May 14, 21.
Pemba
Slavery in;Correspondence Presented, June 6, 1212.
Pembroke Urban District Council (County of Dublin) Bill
c. Con. * May 17, 436.
3R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Penal Servitude Acts
Conditional Licences Granted, May 20, 540, 577.
Pensions Commutation Board
Actuary;Salary, etc.
O. Mr. Tully, May 17, 516.
Peppermint Creams
Sugar Duty;Delay in Levying Duty, etc. Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 250.
Petitions
Public Petitions Committee Report, May 15, 232.
Philadelphia
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1442.
Philipps, Mr. J. W. [Pembroke]
Army Horses;Purchase in Austria-Hungary, Corrupt Practices of British Officers alleged, June 6, 1249, 1250, 1262.
County Courts, Welsh-speaking Witnesses in;Observations of Judge Bishop, June 7, 1324.
Pier and Harbour Provisional Orders (No. 1) Bill
Memorandum stating nature of Proposals Ordered, May 15, 173; Presented, May 16, 236.
Pier and Harbour Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 724.
Pilkington, Lieut. Col. R. [Lancashire, Newton]
Horses for South African War, Purchase of, June 6, 1261.
Pilotage
Funds of Liverpool District;Order in Council approving Bye-laws Presented, June 10, 1444, 1454.
Pinner Gas Provisional Order
Board of Trade Report as to dispensing with Consent of District Council Presented, May 16, 236; May 17, 400.
Pir&#x00E6;us and District
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Pirie, Mr. D. V. [Aberdeen, N.]
Army
Estimates, Lack of Details, Demurrage paid on Transport Service, etc., June 6, 1227, 1233.
Horses, Purchase of;Enlargement of Remount Department, etc., June 6, 1260.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16 343.
Militia Disembodiment;Ascertaining Wishes of embodied Battalions, May 20 585.
South African War
Carrington, Maj.-Gen. Sir F., Selection by War Office, May 16, 242
Inquiry into Conduct of War;Return of Troops, etc., June 7, 1427.
Officers and Men returning, Discrepancies, etc., June 6, 1277.
Sugar Duty;Peppermint Creams, Delay in levying duty on Consigment of, May 16, 250.
Plague
St. Helena, Precaution against Plague at;Prohibition of the Landing of Persons and Stores from Durban, etc.
Q. Mr. Bathurst; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 16, 238.
South African War;Number of Cases, etc.
Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 951.
Platt-Higgins, Mr. F. [Salford, N.]
South African War;Employment of armed Natives by the Boers, treatment of the Natives, etc., June 10, 1455.
Police
City of London Commissioner of Police;Acting independently of the Home Office
Q. Col. Lockwood; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 10, 1464.
Constabulary, Royal Irish, see that title.
Counties and Boroughs;England and Wales;Report of Inspector of Constabulary Presented, June 10, 1444, 1453.
Dublin Metropolitan Police, see Dublin.
Metropolitan Police, see that title.
South African Constabulary, see that title.
Tyne Police Force, Refusal of Certificate;Correspondence relative to, Presented, May 22, 883.
Police Superannuation (Scotland) Bill
Petition, May 14, 42; May 16, 235; May 24, 1105.
Poor Law Officers' Superannuation (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, May 16, 235.
Poplar and Stepney Roads
Maintenance of;London County Council Repudiation of Liability, alleged
Q. Mr. H. Samuel; A. Mr. Long, May 21, 775.
Poppy Cultivation
India;Increase in Bengal, Discouraging Manufacture of Opinm, proposed
Q. Mr. S. Smith; A. Lord G. Hamilton, May 23, 958.
Population
Census Returns, see Census.
Portmadoc, Beddgelert and South Snowdon Railway Bill
l. 3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Portsmouth
King's Bastion, Destruction of
Q. Lord Balcarres; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 585.
Portugal
Trade Reports Presented, May 21, 725; June 10, 1441.
Post Office
Postmaster General;Marquess of Londonderry
Representative in House of Commons;Mr. A. Chamberlain.
Administration of the Department
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1357; June 10, 1558.
County Districts;Sanctioning Additional Facilities in Districts where Expenditure outbalances Receipts
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 6, 1217.
Deliveries, Acceleration of;Three Classes of Postmen Proposed, etc.
O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 10, 1561.
Employees
Grievances, Inquiry into;Appointment of Permanent Committee, etc,
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1366, 1371, 1374, 1375, 1377, 1379, 1380, 1381, 1382, 1383, 1387, 1394, 1396; June 10, 1563, 1567, 1569, 1574, 1577, 1582.
House of Commons Committee, Parliamentary Pressure, June 7, 1382, 1383, 1387, 1394, 1397; June 10, 1565.
Holidays;Queen Victoria's Birthday Qs. Mr. Hay, Sir F. Evans, Capt. Norton; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 972.
Pensions held by Officials;Regulations, Deductions from Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. Labouchere; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 20, 596.
Postal Clerks' Deputation to Postmaster-General
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 974.
Postmen, see that title.
Sunday Duty, Increase of;Voluntary or Compulsory Duty, System of Payment, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1358, 1364; June 10, 1564, 1567, 1574.
Telegraph Service, see that title.
Irish Questions
Baltimore Mails;Delay in Delivery of Letters
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 21, 783.
Cork, see that title.
Dublin, see that title.
Firies Postal Deliveries;Reply to Inquiry
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 7, 1330.
Girl Clerks;Training in London' Scale of Payment in Dublin) etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 985.
Inniskeen, Sunday Post to and from Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 62.
Kilrush Postmastership;Filling Vacant Appointment
Q. Maj. Jameson; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 459.
Limerick, Case of T. Liston, Rural Postman;Reduction of Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 10, 1472.
Monaghan;Tri-weekly Delivery of Letters at Swan's Cross.
Q. Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 24, 1122.
Newtown District, Queen's Co.;Delay in Delivery of Letters
Q. Dr. MacDonnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 986.
Postal Deliveries, Facilitating
Os. Mr. Gilhooly, June 10, 1567; Col. Nolan, 1568; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1574.
Savings Bank Business;Transferring Accounts to Dublin, proposed
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 986.
Mail Carts and Horses, Condition, etc.
Os. Mr. Banbury, June 7, 1395; Mr. J. Burns, June 10, 1570.
Mail Service, see that title.
Mount Pleasant Sorting Office;Medical Officer, Appointment proposed, etc.
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 6, 1216.
Packet Service, see title Post Office Packet Service.
Postage Stamps, see that title.
Postmasters, see that title.
Printing Department suggested O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 10, 1562.
Revenue derived from;Inaccuracies in Budget Statement, alleged
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 617.
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, June 7, 1357; June 10, 1554.
Scotch Questions
Aberdeen, see that title.
Highlands and Islands, Increasing facilities, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1367, 1370, 1390, 1391; June 10, 1566.
Kyle and Inverness;Improved Mail Service
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 55.
Ross-shire Postal Arrangements;Additional Postal Facilities in Districts where Expenditure outbalances Receipts
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 6, 1217.
Stornoway Mail Service, Cost, etc.
O. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 7, 1392.
Telephone Service, see that title.
Telegraph Service, see that title.
Treasury Control of Post Office Funds, an obstacle to development of the Post Office
Os. Mr. J. Dewar, June 7, 1368; Mr. J. Hope, 1373; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1392; June 10, 1576.
Post Office Packet Service
Subsidies, Charging to Admiralty instead of Post Office, proposed
O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 7, 1412.
Vote for, June 7, 1403; June 10, 1554.
Postage Stamps
Designs for new Stamps, Entrusting to Austrian Artist, etc.
Qs. Mr. E. Griffith, Lord Balcarres, Dr. Farquharson; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 974, 975.
Qs. Dr. Farquharson, Mr. E. Griffith; As. Mr. A Chamberlain, June 6, 1215.
Exchange of Foreign, etc., Stamps at Post Offices, proposed
O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 10, 1561.
Ireland;Nenagh Stamp Distributor, Delay in Appointment
Q. Mr. P. J. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 985.
Postal Orders
Extension to Australia, etc.
O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 10, 1560.
Lost Orders, Profit on;Issuing Postal Orders with Counterfoil proposed.
References to in Debate in Committee of Supply, June 7, 1391, 1393; June 10, 1560.
Postmaster-General
Marquess of Londonderry.
House of Lords, Objections to Postmaster-General sitting in.
References to in Debate in Committee of Supply, June 7, 1411; June 10, 1558, 1566, 1569, 1574, 1576, 1583.
Postmasters
Postmasterships and Sub-postmasterships;Number of Appointments, Selection of Candidates, etc.
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 263.
Promotions to;Powers of Supervisors
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 972.
Postmen
Christmas Boxes, Allowance in lieu of;Giving Allowance to "Indoor Men"
Os. Mr. E. J. C. Morton, June 7, 1363; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1379.
Classification of;Three Classes to deliver Letters, Newspapers, and Parcels, proposed
O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 10, 1561.
Irish Rural Auxiliary Postmen and Labourers' Cottages
Q. Mr. Crean; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 981.
Nottingham, Postmen's Walks in;Advertising Vacancies on Notice Boards, etc., proposed
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 20, 597.
Poulton-le-Fylde Gas Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 398.
c. 1R. * May 20, 576.
Power, Mr. P. J. [Waterford, E.]
Allotments in Urban Districts;Legislation proposed, May 23, 981.
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1158.
Fishery Loans;Printing Amended Rules, May 21, 779.
Income Tax;Rebate, Status of Clerk, Simplifying Forms, etc., June 7, 1338.
Prayers
Form of Prayers used in the House of Commons, Person Responsible for
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 24, 1130.
Prestatyn Water Bill
c. 2R. * June 10, 1448.
Prevention of Corruption (No. 2) Bill
l. Intro., and 1R. * May 21, 739.
2R, June 10, 1445.
Prisoners
Conveyance of;Death in Prison Van Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 17, 451.
Prisons
Dietary, etc., in Local and Convict Prisons Draft of Rules presented, May 21, 725, 760.
Cavan Old Prison;Handing over to Military Authorities
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 21, 778.
Military Convicts from South Africa in Civil Prisons
Qs. Mr. Lambert, Mr. Spear; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1316.
Prisons (Scotland) Bill
l. Report, * May 14, 10; May 17, 421, 3R. * May 21, 726.
c. 1R. * June 6, 1220.
Private Bill Procedure (Scotland)
Bills to be proceeded with by Private Bills and by Provisional Orders;Report from Chairman of Committees of Lords and Commons, May 21, 759.
Procedure
Introduction of New Clauses on Consideration Stage, Objections to
Os. Mr. T. M. Healy, Mr. J. W. Lowther, May 24, 1101.
Local Inquiry, Submitting Clauses to
Os. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mr. Blake, June 10, 1448, 1449.
Opposition in the House of Lords and the interval between first and third Readings
Os. Earl Morley, Lord Balfour of Burleigh, Earl of Camperdown, May 20, 536, 537, 538.
Proceedings and Decisions of Parliamentary Commissions on Private Bills, etc., Communicating to the House
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Dickson, May 14, 54.
Taking Third Reading on same day as Consideration Stage
Os. Mr. Caldwell, Mr. T. M Healy, Mr. A. G. Murray, May 15, 170.
(for particular Bills, see their Names.
Private Bills
Group K.;Witness ordered to attend Committee, May 15, 172; May 22, 881.
Group L.;Witness ordered to attend Committee, May 14, 41; May 20, 574.
Private Business
Devolution, Policy of
References to in Debate on the Duration of Speeches in Parliament May 14, 147, 149.
Private Legislation Procedure (Ireland) Bill
l. 1R. * May 17, 400.
Private Members' Business
Government Time on Supply practically was Private Members' Time
O. Mr. S. Wortley, May 24, 1191.
Private Members' Rights, Infringement of References to in Debate on Adjournment of the House (Whitsuntide Motion), May 23, 990, 991, 993, 997, 1004, 1005.
Statement on Motion for the Whitsuntide Recess (Mr. A. J. Balfour), May 23, 989.
Time Limit proposed
O. Mr. Cripps, May 14, 146.
Privy Council Office
Administration, Expenditure, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 463.
Clerk to the Council, Duties, Salary, etc., 465, 469.
Judicial Department;Salary of Chief Clerk, etc., 477.
Lord President, Duty, Salary, etc., Sinecure Office, alleged, 463.
Private Secretary to the Lord President, Salary;Dual Appointment, etc., 469.
Registrar, Salary, etc., Reduction proposed, 477.
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 463.
Pryce-Jones, Lieut.-Col. E. [Montgomery Boroughs]
Volunteers;Officers who have served in South Africa, Granting Honorary Army Rank, June 10, 1460.
Welsh Regiment, Volunteer Service Company;Pet Goat and Quarantine Regulations, May 17, 442.
Public Accounts Committee
Report, May 15, 231.
Public Health (Scotland) Act, 1897
Petition, June 10, 1452.
Public Holidays
Queen Victoria's Birthday, see that title.
Public Houses Hours of Closing (Scotland) Act, 1887.
Extending to all places, proposed
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 21, 776.
Public Libraries Bill
c. 1R. * May 23, 989.
Public Petitions Committee
Report, May 15, 232.
Public Records
see Records.
Public Service
Grievances;Pressure put upon the House, Jeopardising the future of the Public Service
O. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 7, 1381.
Public Works Loan Commission
Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 531.
Pupil Teachers
see Education.
Purchase of Land (Ireland) Bill
c. Intro. and 1R., May 20, 612.
2R. * June 10, 1553.
Purvis, Mr. R. [Peterborough]
Beer Bill;Business of the House, May 23, 999.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 148.
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill, 2R., May 17, 424.
Q
Queen Anne's Bounty Board
Constitution of Board, etc., Inquiry;Re-appointment of Joint Committee
Q. Lord Barnard; A. Marquess of Salisbury, May 14, 35.
Message to the Lords, May 24, 1134.
Queen Victoria's Birthday
Post Office Servants' Holiday
Qs. Mr. Hay, Sir F. Evans, Capt. Norton; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 972.
Queensferry, North
Fortifications, Proposed;Boundary Fence Qs. Mr. J. Hope, Lord Balcarres; As. Lord Stanley, May 17, 442.
Queensland
Asiatic Labour, Bill Prohibiting;Royal Sanction refused
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 7, 1322.
Questions in the House
Procedure
Answers;Placing in the Library, Expediting "Hansard" Report, etc.
Qs. Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. Schwann, Mr. C. Grant; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 7, 1331.
Asking Questions at the Conclusion of Public Business, proposed
Q. Mr. Randles; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 607.
Member putting Question in the name of another Member
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Speaker, May 21, 763.
Time Limit proposed
O. Mr. Cripps, May 14, 146.
R
Raglan, Lord;Under Secretary of State for War
Education of Soldiers for Civil Life, May 20, 563.
Rifle Ranges, Expenditure on;Yeomanry using Ranges provided by Government, etc., May 17, 422, 423.
Rifles, New Service Pattern Rifle;Comparison with German Rifles, etc., May 20, 567.
South African War;Conduct of the War, Defective Maps, Management of Remount Department, Railways, etc., May 21, 746.
Railways
Brake Trials. Result of, etc.
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 16, 253.
Cycles, see that title.
Foreign Countries, see their names.
Ireland
Birr and Portumna Railway, Restoring and Working, Government advance
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 274.
Great Southern and Western Railway Company;Through Rates, etc., for Irish Produce
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 17, 458.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 24, 1128.
Materials, Purchase of, for Railways under Control of the British Government, see titles India and Egypt;Railways.
Sparks;Compensation for Damage to Crops, etc., Bill, see that title.
Workmen's Trains, see that title.
Randles, Mr. J. S. [Cumberland, Cocker-mouth]
Questions in the House, Asking at the end of Public Business, proposed, May 20, 607.
Rankin, Sir J. (Herefordshire, Leominster]
Militia;Age Regulations, May 23, 954.
Rasch, Maj. F. C. [Essex, Chelmsford]
Army
Ammunition;Reserve of Small Arms Ammunition, May 20, 581; May 23, 1019.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 328.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 129.
Militia;Competitive Examination, date, etc., June 10, 1461.
South African War;False Statements, Prosecution of Propagators of False News, proposed, June 10, 1457.
Rathdrum Union
Labourers' Cottages Scheme;Appointment of Arbitrator, Delays, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 456.
Re-afforesting
Scotland and Ireland, see those titles;Afforesting.
Record Office
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 523.
Records
Calendars;Distribution gratis among Members of the House, Public Institutions, etc., proposed
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 523.
Investigation of Documents in Rome, Spain, etc., Allocation of Funds
O. Sir T. Esmonde, May 17, 525.
Ireland
Allocation of Money for Publication;Irish Record Commission, proposed, etc.
Os. Sir T. Esmonde, May 17, 525; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 527.
Brehon Laws, see that title.
Publication of remaining Volumes of Ancient Laws
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 14, 62.
Local Records, Preservation of;Report of Treasury Committee, etc.
Q. Mr. Bull; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 608.
Public Records;Annual Report Presented, June 6, 1212.
Recruits
see Army.
Reddy, Mr. M. [King's Court, Birr]
Birr and Portumna Railway, Restoring and Working;Government Advance, May 16, 274.
Clanricarde Estate Evictions;Cost incurred by Government, May 16, 274.
National School Teachers;Salaries, Teachers Examined before March, 1901, May 16, 273.
Tullamore Quarter Sessions;Judge discharging Jury, Fine, etc., June 10, 1471
Redmond, Mr. John [Waterford]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 691; May 23, 1081.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Committee;Resignation of Member, June 7, 1334.
Irish Language, Teaching of, in Irish Schools, May 21, 878.
Training Colleges and Professors of Irish Language, June 6, 1217.
Kearon, T., Case of;Street Preaching at Arklow, Conviction for Assault, etc., May 24, 1126.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 937.
Purchase of Land (Ireland) Bill, Intro., May 20, 613.
Rules and Order of Debate;Discussing Subject embodied in Motion on the Paper on a Motion for the Adjournment of the House for Recess, May 23, 1011.
Supply Procedure;Reports of Supply, Stating "Orders of the Day" particular Votes to be Reported, May 14, 64.
Redmond, Mr. William [Clare, E.]
Cecil Manuscripts, Publication of, May 17, 531.
China;Tientsin, British Boat in the Pei-ho fired on by Germans, May 21, 767, 768, 771.
Chinese Labour, Introduction of, into South Africa, etc., May 14, 46.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 141.
Finance Bill, May 20, 630.
House of Commons;Telegraph Department Accommodation, May 17, 531.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 933.
Merchant Shipping, Inefficient Manning
A. B. Seamen, Proof of Service-Board of Trade Powers, etc., May 16, 254.
Committee on Manning, Recommendations of, May 16, 255, 256.
Number of Inefficiently manned ships lost in the last Twenty years, May 16, 253.
Regulations defining proper manning, etc., May 21, 772.
Morony, D., Case of;Arrest and Imprisonment, May 23, 980.
Post Office Department Administration;Employees' Grievances, Postmaster General sitting in House of Lords, etc., June 10, 1580.
Questions in the House;Member putting Question which stood in the name of another Member, May 21, 763.
Reformatory and Industrial Schools
Boy Recruits;Boys drafted into Army without Consent of Father
Q. Mr. J O'Connor; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 10, 1465.
Ireland
Application for Committal of C. Miller to Strabane Industrial School.
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 978.
Committals, Reduction in Number;Compensation to Managers.
Q. Mr. Delany; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 604.
Regimental Titles
Naming Regiments after Colonies which; had sent Troops to South Africa proposed
Q. Sir C. Cayzer; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 582.
Registrar-General's Office, England
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, May 17, 531.
Registration of Clubs Bill
Petitions, June 7, 1312.
Registration of Firms Bill
Petitions, May 14, 42.
Registration of Voters, Ireland
Return Presented, May 24, 1105.
Registry of Deeds Office, Dublin
see Dublin.
Reid, Sir R. [Dumfries Burghs]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 793.
Religion
Declarations of Heads of States;Delay in furnishing Return
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 988.
Return Presented, May 23, 950.
Religious Tests
Charities;Disqualification of Nonconformists as Trustees
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 483.
Renshaw, Mr. C. B. [Renfrew, W.]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 20, 679.
Income Tax Return, June 7, 1343.
Inland Revenue Department;Appointment of Surveyors and Laud Valuation Assessors in Scotland, June 7, 1348.
Rent Reductions, Ireland
Parliamentary Return proposed
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1123.
Rentoul, Mr. J. A. [Down, E.]
Irish Language, Teaching of, in Irish Schools, May 21, 860.
Labourers (Ireland) Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., May 22, 914.
Renwick, Mr. G. [Newcastle-on-Tyne]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 154.
Volunteers;Discharge of returned Volunteers, Furlough and Pay, June 10, 1459.
Representative Peer for Ireland
Arran, Earl of, May 14, 1; May 17, 397.
Restaurants
Waiters in London Restaurants;Hours of Labour, Legislation proposed.
Q. Mr. Keir Hardie; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 7, 1323.
Revenue and Expenditure;Finance System, etc.
Accounts;Complaints as to Confusion and the inaccurate manner in which Accounts were presented to the House
Debate on the Finance Bill, May 20, 615.
Appropriations-in-Aid;Parliamentary Control
Os. Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1283.
Deficiency Borrowings, Interest charged on, Including in South African War Expenditure
Qs. Mr. M'Crae, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Sir M. H. Beach, May 20, 589.
Rate of Interest paid to Bank of England, 1899&#x2013;1901
Q. Mr. Loyd; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 24, 1116.
England, Scotland, and Ireland (Provisional), Statement Presented, May 17, 440.
Expenditure
Army and Navy Expenditure, titles Army and Navy.
Civil Service, see that title.
Comparison with years 1892, 1896 and 1900;increase in Peace Expenditure by present Administration, Providing for Peace Deficit, etc.
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 618; May 21, 793; May 23, 1051.
"Cutting down" Committee proposed References to in the Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 661, 663; May 21, 834.
France, Russia, Italy and the United States, National Expenditure in Os. Mr. Cohen, May 20, 670; Mr. Hanbury, 21, 801.
War Expenditure;Amount, etc. Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 625.
National Debt, see that title.
Revolvers
Restrictions, on Sale
Q. Mr. McDermott; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 20, 591.
Rhodesia
Chinese Labour, Introduction of;Government Control, Poll Tax on Chinese in Australasia
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 14, 46.
Richmond Gas Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 17, 399.
Rickett, Mr. J. C. [Scarborough]
Trinidad, Education in;Closing Government Schools, etc., May 17, 445.
Ridley, Mr. S. F. [Bethnal Green, S. W.]
London Water Supply;Government Measures, Charges, Discontinuing increased Rent for increased Rates, June 10, 1465.
Rifle Ranges
Expenditure on, Allocation of Grant, etc.
Q. Earl of Dartmouth; A. Lord Raglan, May 17, 421.
Government Provision, Ranges for Volunteers
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1301, 1302, 1303, 1304.
Swindon;Closing of Ranges
Os. Marquess of Ailesbury, Lord Raglan, May 17, 422.
Yeomanry using Ranges provided by the Government
Q. Lord Hams; A. Lord Raglan, May 17, 421.
Rifles
New Pattern Rifle
Os. Mr. Dillon, June 6, 1287; Mr. Brodrick, 1290.
Shortening Rifles, Advantages, etc.
Os. Earl Stanhope, May 20, 566, 568; Lord Tweedmouth, Lord Raglan, 567.
Sighting;Defective Sighting
O. Mr. Dillon, June 6, 1286.
Ripon Corporation Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 17, 398.
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. C. T.;Secretary of State far the Home Department [Croydon]
Barmaids;Hours of Labour of London Barmaids, May 16, 252.
City of London Police;Commissioner acting independently of the Home Office, June 10, 1465.
Colliery Disaster at Senghenydd, May 24, 1118, 1207.
Croydon Brawling Case, May 21, 772.
Dockyard Police;Lodging Allowance, Additional Pay, etc., June 6, 1291, 1292, 1294, 1295.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 158.
Explosives Acts, Breaches of;Inadequate Penalties, etc., May 16, 253.
Firearms, Regulating use of;Death of W. Dodd, May 20, 592.
Industrial Schools, Boy Recruits;Boys drafted into Army without consent of Father, June 10, 1465.
Lascars on P. &amp; O. Steamers, Accommodation for, June 7, 1417.
Lead Poisoning
Increase in Number of serious cases, etc., May 17, 450.
Potteries Arbitration;Home Office Control, June 7, 1323.
London Irish Volunteers;Resignation of O'Sullivan, Fines imposed, etc., May 21, 766.
Prisoners, Conveyance of;Death in Prison Van, May 17, 451.
Truck Acts, Remission of Fines;Case of Squire v. Sweeny, May 17, 451.
Waiters in London Restaurants, Hours of Labour;Legislation proposed, June 7, 1323.
Workmen's Compensation Act, Assessment of Average Weekly Wage;Definition of Term "week," June 7, 1324.
Roads
Ireland;Direct Labour, Employment of;Proposed Order in Council
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1126.
Scotland;Badluachrach, Construction of Road at;Application for Grant
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 969.
Stepney and Poplar Main Roads, Maintenance of;London County Council repudiating Liability, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Samuel; A. Mr. Long, May 21, 775.
Roberts, Earl
Commander-in-Chief, see Army.
Plot to Kidnap while in South Africa, Police Agent Gano's connection with, etc.
Qs. Mr. S. MacNeill; As. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 47.
Roberts, Mr. B. [Carnarvonshire, Eifion]
South African War
Boer Killed and Wounded;Disproportion of Boers killed, etc., June 7, 1315
Expenditure;Amount paid to Contractors, June 7, 1317.
False Statements from the Front;Prosecution proposed, June 7, 1320.
Rebels, Trials of;Exclusion of Reporters of "South African News," May 24, 1112; June 7, 1315.
Refuge Camps, Condition of, Mortality among Children, etc., May 24, 1193.
Roberts, Mr H. [Denbighshire, W.]
Agricultural Rating and Tithe Rent Acts;Renewal, May 17, 460.
"Assyrian," Wreck of;Nationality and Behaviour of Crew, etc., June 10, 1466.
China
British Trade in the Yang-tsze Valley;German Trade Developments, Co-operation between the Hamburg-American Steamship and North German Lloyd Companies, June 10, 1462.
Tientsin
Affray between French and British Troops, June 10, 1463.
Anglo-Russian Dispute, May 17, 448.
Yang-tsze Provinces, Disturbances in, May 17, 448.
Robertson, Mr. E. [Dundee]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 357.
Gibraltar Harbour Works;Result of Inquiry, May 20, 610.
Lord President of the Council's Private Secretary, Salary, Duties, etc., May 17, 471.
Naval Works Loan Bill;Date of Introduction, May 21, 784.
South African War
Crops and Grass, Destruction of, May 20, 579.
Vlakfontein Engagement;False Statements from the Front, June 7, 1320.
War Office Organisation Committee Report;Date of Presentation, May 16, 244.
Robson, Mr. W. S. [South Shields]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 23, 1095.
Rodgers' Patent Bill
l. Report, * May 17, 398.
3R. * May 21, 722
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Roman Catholic University for Ireland
see Ireland;University Education.
Roman Catholicism
King's Declaration against
Committee to consider terms of Declaration
Os. Lord Herries, Marquess of Salisbury, May 20, 569.
Motion (Marquess of Salisbury), May 21, 754.
Resignation of Volunteers;Fines imposed
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 21, 766.
Rosario
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Rosebery, Earl of
Licensing Boards Bill, 2R., May 14, 29, 32, 34.
Rosmurrevagh
Pier, Erection of, proposed
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1122.
Ross-shire
Postal Facilities in Districts where Expenditure out-balances Receipts
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 6, 1217.
Roumania
British Steamers in Roumanian Ports;Quarantine Regulations
Q. Mr. Hain; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 23, 960.
Royal Exchange Assurance Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 948.
3R. * June 6, 1209.
Royal Irish Constabulary
see Constabulary, Royal Irish.
"Runic," S. S.
Seaman Dean, Case of;Inquiry, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 20, 591.
Russell, Mr. T. W. [Tyrone, S.]
Labourers [Ireland] Acts Amendment Bill, 2R. May 22, 929.
Russia
National Expenditure
O. Mr. Cohen, May 20, 670.
Navy;Construction of Fast Cruisers, Speed of "Varyag," etc.
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 23, 956.
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
S
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford (Northants, N.)
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill 2R., May 17, 431.
Saffron Walden
Parliamentary By-Eleetion;New Member affirmed, June 6, 1220.
St. Bartholomew's Hospital Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 398.
c. 1R. * May 20, 576.
St. Cross Hospital
Trustees;Disqualification of Nonconformists, Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 483.
St. George, Botolph Lane, and St. Botolph, Billingsgate
Scheme for Union of Benefices Presented, June 6, 1214.
St. Helena
Boer Prisoners, see South African War;Prisoners
Durban, Plague at;Prohibition of the landing of Persons and Stores at St. Helena, etc.
Q. Mr. Bathurst; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 16, 238.
St. Katherine's Hospital
Appropriation of Funds, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 501.
St. Mary-at-Hill and St. Andrew Hubbard
Scheme for Union of Benefices Presented, June 6, 1214.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors on Sunday Bill
Petitions, May 14, 42; May 15, 172; May 16, 235; May 17, 439; May 20, 577; May 21, 759; May 22, 883; May 23, 949; June 6, 1211; June 7, 1312; June 10, 1452.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill
Facilities for passing Bill, etc.
Q. Mr. Taylor; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 23, 987.
Q. Sir H. Fowler; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 16, 276.
Debate on Whitsuntide Adjournment Motion, May 23, 991, 1000, 1002.
Petitions, May 14, 42; May 15, 172; May 16, 235; May 17, 439; May 20, 577; May 21, 759; May 22, 883; May 23, 949; May 24, 1105; June 6, 1211; June 7, 1313; June 10, 1452.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, May 14, 43; May 15, 172; May 17, 440; May 20, 577; May 21, 759 May 22, 883; June 6, 1211; June 7, 1313; June 10, 1452.
Salisbury, Marquess of;Prime Minister and Lord Privy Seal.
Betting;Inquiry, Motion for Select Committee, May 20, 552.
Habitual Drunkards' Bill, Com., May 17, 405, 415.
Licensing Boards' Bill, 2R., May 14, 26, 30.
Queen Anne's Bounty Board, Constitution of, etc., Inquiry;Re-appointment of Joint Committee, May 14, 35.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Committee to consider terms of Declaration, May 20, 569; May 21, 754.
Salisbury Plain
Drainage and Sewage of New Barracks Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1167.
Roads, Damage done to Roads;Ratepayers' Grievance
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1168.
Samuel, Mr. H. [Tower Hamlets, Limehouse]
Stepney and Poplar Main Roads, Maintenance of;London County Council repudiating Liability, alleged, May 21, 775.
Sasine Office, Edinburgh
see Edinburgh.
Sassoon, Sir E. [Hythe]
China;Chefoo-Wei-hai-wei Cable, Construction, Asking for Public Tender, etc., May 17, 449.
Indian Telegraph Rate;German Emden-Ireland Cable, May 17, 445.
Saunderson, Col. Rt. Hon. E. J. [Armagh, N.]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 139.
Savings Bank
Irish Post Office Savings Bank, Keeping Accounts in London;Proposed Transference to Dublin
Q. Mr T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 986.
Military Savings Banks;Statement of Accounts Presented, June 7, 1314.
School Board Elections (Scotland
Petition for Alteration of Law, May 20, 577.
School Inspectors
see Education;Inspectors.
Schwann, Mr. C. E. [Manchester, N]
Army Recruits;Age Regulations, May 20, 584.
Census Enumerators, Payment of, May 16, 257.
Indian Famine, Extent of Numbers in Receipt of Relief;Suspension of Information, May 16, 247.
Post Office Employees' Grievances, June 7, 1371.
Postmasterships and Sub-Postmasterships;Number of Appointments, Selection of Candidates, etc., May 16, 263.
Questions in the House;Placing Answers in the Library, proposed, June 7, 1332.
Telegraphists;Punishment for Errors, etc., May 20, 597.
Workmen's Compensation Act Administration;Assessment of Average Weekly Wage, Definition of Term "Week," June 7, 1324.
Scotland
Secretary;Rt. Hon. Lord Balfour of Burleigh.
Under-Secretary;Sir C. Scott Moncreiff.
Lord Advocate;Rt. Hon. A. G. Murray.
Solicitor-General;Mr. C. Scott-Dick-son.
Aberdeen, see that title.
Afforestation;Experiments in Highlands and Islands, proposed
Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 24, 1120.
Allotments and Common Pastures;Proceedings of Parish and County Councils, Return
Q. Mr. E. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 24, 1120.
Armadale;Construction of Pier, Government Grant
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. Dickson, May 14, 53.
Badluachrach, Road Construction at;Application for Grant
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 969.
Cava, Island of;Charges borne by Parish of Orphir in respect of Island, etc.
Q. Mr. C. Wason; Mr. A. G. Murray, May 17, 453.
Census
Enumerators, Delay in payment of
Q. Mr. Caldwell; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 20, 598.
Population of Scotland
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 20, 598.
Congested Districts
Secretary for Scotland;Visit to Congested Districts proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 970.
(for particular Districts, see their Names).
Congested Districts Board, see that title.
Continuation Classes;Relation of Managers to County Technical Instruction Committees, etc.
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 21, 776.
Death Certificates;Legislation
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 16, 259.
Edinburgh, see that title.
Education;for collective heading, see Education.
Glasgow, see that title.
Government Printing Contracts with Messrs. Neill &amp; Co.;Fair Wage Regulations, etc.
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 261.
Highlands and Islands, see that title.
Income Tax, Date of Collection;Earlier Date and closer collection in Scotland than in England, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1339, 1342, 1343, 1344, 1349, 1351.
Inland Revenue Surveyors and Land Valuation Assessors, Appointment of;New Regulation
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1348, 1352, 1353, 1354.
Licensing Boards Bill, Application to Scotland
Os. Lord Belper, May 14, 18, 19; Earl of Camperdown, 18; Visc. Peel, 22.
Linlithgow Procurator Fiscal;Appointment of Mr. J. Main
Q. Mr. J. Wilson; A. Mr. Dickson, May 14, 53.
Mail Service;for collective heading, see that title.
Population and Valuation of Counties, Burghs and Parishes;Return Presented, June 6, 1212.
(see also sub-heading Census).
Post Office;for collective heading, see that title.
Private Bill Procedure, see that title.
Public Houses, Hours of Closing Act, 1887;Extension to all Places, proposed
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 21, 776.
Queensferry, North, Fortifications;Boundary Fence
Qs. Mr. J. Hope, Lord Balcarres; As. Lord Stanley, May 17, 442.
Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom, Amount Contributed, etc.;Provisional Statement Presented, May 17, 440.
School Board Elections;Petitions for Alteration of Law, May 20, 577.
Skye Mail Service;Proposed Steamer Service between Mallaig and West Coast of Skye
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 10, 1466.
Spirits, Illicit Distillation;Number of Seizures, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1339, 1342, 1343, 1345, 1346; June 10, 1555, 1556.
Stornoway, see that title.
Training Colleges;Reports and Papers for 1900 Presented, June 6, 1212.
Uist, South;Crofters threatening to take posesssion of Farm of Bornish, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 970.
Scottish Provident Institution Provisional Order Confirmation Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 38.
Seamen;Merchant Service
Continuous Discharges;Proof of Service of Able-bodied Seamen, etc.
Qs. Mr. W. Redmond, Col. Denny; As. Mr. G. Balfour, May 16, 254.
Crew Accommodation;Lascars on P. and O. Steamers, References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1407, 1409, 1410, 1413, 1414, 1415, 1416, 1417, 1418, 1420.
Manning of Ships, see Merchant Shipping.
Sight Tests;Report Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
Secondary and Technical Education
see Education.
Senghenydd
Colliery Disaster
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 24, 1118.
O. Mr. Ritchie, May 24, 1207.
Seton-Karr, Mr. H. [St. Helens]
Business of the House;Whitsuntide Recess, Invasion of Private Members' Rights, etc., May 23, 997.
Sewage and Drainage (Local Authorities) Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 65.
Shannon Water and Electric Power Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
Sharpe, Mr. W. [Kensington, N.]
Burma;Rubber Trees, Developing Cultivation of, etc., May 17, 444.
Shaw, Mr. T. [Hawick Burghs]
Income Tax, Collection in Scotland;Return, etc, June 7, 1344, 1351.
Sheffield Corporation Bill
c. 2R. * May 20, 573.
Sheffield District Railway Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 438.
Con. * May 22, 881.
3R. * June 6, 1209.
l. Commons Amendts. * June 10, 1438.
Sheridan, Serjeant
Constabulary, Royal Irish, Dismissal from;Case of Daniel McGoohan
Q. Mr. Tully; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 14, 59.
Shipbuilding
Bounties on;Reports from H. M. Representatives Abroad Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
Shipping
see Merchant Shipping.
Shireoaks, Laughton and Maltby Railway Bill
c. Con. * June 6, 1209.
3R. * June 10, 1450.
Shops Bill
Petitions, May 14, 43; June 10, 1453.
Shops (Early Closing) Bill
Petitions, May 20, 541.
Shorncliffe
Military Disturbance
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1321.
Shrewsbury Gas Bill
c. 2R. * May 20, 573.
Sight Tests
Mercantile Marine;Report Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
Silver Coinage
Loss on Worn Coin withdrawn from Circulation
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 508.
Simeon, Sir B. [Southampton]
Southampton, Ordnance Survey, Assistants at;Reductions in Number, etc., June 7, 1325.
Sinclair, Capt. J. [Forfar]
Canada;Live Cattle, Exclusion from British Ports, May 20, 592.
Sinclair, Mr. L. [Essex, Romford]
Army Horses, System of Purchasing;Use of Motor Oars, etc., June 6, 1248.
Sinking Fund
National Debt;Account Presented, June 6, 1214.
Suspension of;Budget Proposal Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 637.
Sittings of the House
Exemption of Standing Order, see Twelve O'Clock Rule.
Whitsuntide Recess, see that title.
Skye
Mail Service;Proposed Steamer Service between Mallaig and West Coast
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 10, 1466.
Slavery
Zanzibar and Pemba, Slavery in;Correspondence Presented, June 6, 1212.
Sligo Asylum
Gaffney, Attendant;Prosecution, proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. Moore; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1122.
Small Arms Ammunition
Reserve of Cartridges, see Cartridges.
Smith, Mr. Parker [Lanark, Partick]
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 161.
Smith, Mr. S. [Flintshire]
Barmaids;Hours of Labour of London Barmaids, May 16, 252.
India;Poppy Cultivation in Bengal, Increase of, etc., May 23, 958.
Soames, Mr. A. W. [Norfolk, S.]
Privy Council, Judicial Department, Salary of Chief Clerk, etc., May 17, 477.
Soldiers
Employment for Reserve and Time-expired men
Education of Soldiers for Civil Life, Debate (Lords), May 20, 556.
Messengers in National Debt Office
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 514, 518, 519.
Pay, see Army;Pay.
Solicitor-General
Sir E. Carson.
Solicitor-General for Scotland
Mr. C. Scott-Dickson.
Solicitors Bill
l. Com., May 14, 33.
Report, * May 21, 725.
3R. * June 10, 1446.
Somaliland
Ogaden Somalis, Punitive Expedition;Correspondence relating to Murder of Mr. Jenner, Presented, May 21, 724, 760.
Somersetshire
West Somersetshire Yeomanry, see Yeomanry.
South African Constabulary
Character, Evidence required
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 10, 1456.
South African Crisis
Policy of the Government prior to the outbreak of the War
Os. Mr. Morley, May 23, 1081; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1092.
South African Land Settlement
Commission;Report with Minutes of Evidence, etc., Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
"South African News"
Cartwright's, Mr., Imprisonment for Criminal Libel;Mitigation of Sentence, etc.
Q. Mr. S. Evans; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 14, 43.
Trials of Cape Colony Rebels;Exclusion of Reporters
Q. Mr. B. Roberts; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1112; Q. Mr. B. Roberts; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1315.
South African Settlement
Assistance to Farmers, Establishment of Stock Farms, etc.
Os. Mr. Trevelyan, May 23, 1019; Mr. Lambert, 1021; Mr. Brodrick, 1035.
Number and Locality of Farms;Number of Cattle
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1111.
South African War
Allotment of Soldiers' Pay;Delay in Payment to Wives
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 581.
Australian Contingents;Hospital treatment, Complaints
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 46.
Boers Killed and Wounded;Lord Kitchener's Reports, Disproportion of Boers killed
Q. Mr. B. Roberts; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1315.
Botha, Gen.;Peace Negotiations, see that title.
British Forces
Number sent to South Africa 1899&#x2013;1901;Return Presented, May 17, 400; May 20, 578.
Strength of Regiments
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. Biodrick, May 23, 953.
Bullets, Withdrawal of Mark IV. Ammunition, see title Bullets.
Cape Colony;Refuge Camps, Farm Burning, etc., see those sub-headings.
Carrington's, Maj.-Gen. Sir G., Appointment to Command;Selection by War Office, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 242.
Casualties
Boer killed and wounded, see that sub-heading.
Inclusion of Temporary Losses by Capture in Monthly Casualty Lists, etc.
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 239.
Sick List;Second Worcesters
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Lord Stanley, May 23, 951.
Withholding Particulars of Battles and Dates
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1317.
Cattle Looting by Zulus, see sub-heading Zulu Cattle Raids.
Colonial Contingents
Number of Troops sent from Canada and Australasia in proportion to population
O. Mr. G. Parker, May 20, 702.
Regimental Titles;Naming Regiments in British Army after Colonies, proposed
Q. Sir C. Cayzer; A. Lord Stanley, May 20, 582.
Conduct of the War
Debate (Lords), May 21, 744, 746, 749, 752.
Inquiry, see that sub-heading.
Crops and Grass, Destruction of
Q. Mr. E. Robertson; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 20, 579.
Death Duties and Officers' Estates, see Death Duties.
Destruction of Property, see sub-headings Farm Burning, etc.
Expenditure
Contractors, Amount paid to
Qs. Mr. Labouchere, Mr. B. Roberts; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1317.
Contributions from Transvaal and Orange River Colony
References to in Debate on Finance Bill, May 21, 808; May 23, 1067, 1079.
Transvaal Gold Mines, Taxing towards Cost of the War
Q. Mr. Ashton; A. Mr., T. Chamberlain, May 24, 1112.
Mode of Paying for the War
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 625; May 21, 807; May 23, 1093.
Farm Burning
Cape Colony;Number of Farms burnt
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1109.
De Wet's, Gen., Farm, Destruction of, etc.
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 242; Qs. Mr. Labouchere, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1109.
Discontinuance of;Number burnt since Jan, 1901, etc.
Qs. Mr. J. Ellis, Mr. Flavin; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 10, 1458.
Rebuilding Farms, proposed
Q. Mr. Flavin; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 17, 440.
Return;Reasons assigned for Burning, etc.
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Brodrick,. May 20, 579.
Ventersburg;Reasons assigned for burning Houses
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 951.
Graves of Soldiers at Spion Kop;Neglected Condition of, alleged
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 239.
Hartebeestefontein, Destruction of
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 242.
Hoopstad, Isolation of;Evacuation, etc.
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 241.
Horses
Boer Horses, Requisitioning
Os. Mr. Mildmay, June 6, 1259; Mr. Brodrick, 1263.
Carelessness and Bad Management
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1431.
Remount Department;Appointment of untrained Officers
Os. Lord Lovat, May 21, 744; Lord Raglan, 747; Lord Tweedmouth, 750.
Remounts, Supply of, Deficiency, etc.
Os. Mr. Dillon. June 7, 1431; Mr. Brodrick, 1432, 1433.
Return of Horses from South Africa, Cost, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1233, 1237, 1242; June 7, 1433, 1434.
Sale of, after the War;Estimated proceeds
Os. Mr. C. Hobhouse, June 6, 1276; Mr. Brodrick, 1277.
Transport Service, see that title.
Veterinary Department, Administration and Efficiency
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1256, 1272, 1276.
Wastage
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1256, 1272.
Hospital and Medical Arrangements;Australian Contingent, Complaints, see sub-heading Australian Contingents.
Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War;War Office Departmental Inquiries, Effect of on General Inquiry
Qs. Mr. A. Davies, Mr. C. Warner; As. Mr. A. J, Balfour, May 16, 237.
Invalided Soldiers' Pensions and Allowances;Number of Pensions increased since March 18, etc.
Q. Mr. Levy; A. Lord Stanley, May 21, 763.
Kimberley, Sifge;Claims of De Beers Company
Q. Sir C. Furness; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 21, 761.
Kitchener, Lord
Correspondence with Colonial Office
Q. Mr. Labouchere; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1317.
Peace Negotiations, see that subheading.
Lessons of the War
O. Mr. A. Thomas, May 21, 822.
References to in Debate on the Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 82, 101; May 16, 351.
Lichtenburg Garrison, Relief of
Q. Mr. Partington; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 241.
Lindley Disaster;Imperial Yeomanry 10th Batt., Failure to relieve Col. Spragge's Force, etc.
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 10, 1458.
Lovat's Scouts;Physical Tests for Officers Q. Mr. Nussey; A. Lord Stanley, May 23, 956.
Maps;Unsatisfactory Maps supplied to the Troops
Os. Lord Lovat, May 21, 743; Lord Raglan, 746; Lord Tweedmouth, 749; Marquess of Lansdowne, 752.
Meat Contracts;Price paid for Cattle by Contractors, etc.
O. Lord Lovat, May 2, 745.
Militia;Age Regulations, Sending out Militiamen at age of Eighteen
Q. Sir J. Rankin; A. Lord Stanley, May 23, 954.
Natives, Employment of armed Natives by the Boers, Treatment of Natives, etc.
Q. Mr. Platt-Higgins; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 10, 1455.
Naval Brigade;War Honours for Warrant Officers
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, May 17, 441.
Officers' Home Passages;Case of Capt. Maxwell, Refunding Cost of Passage proposed
Q. Col. Welby; A. Lord Stanley, May 24, 1113.
Peace;Gen. Botha and Lord Kitchenei's Negotiations
Botha's, Gen., Account of Negotiations, etc.
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 16, 238.
Instructions given to Lord Kitchener;Despatches from Lord Kitchener
Q. Mr. Labouchere; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1318.
Meeting between Gen. Botha and Lord Kitchener on Feb, 28
Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. Flavin; As. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 7, 1318.
Plague Statistics
Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 951.
Prisoners;Boer Prisoners
Ceylon;Hospital Ship at Colombo, Unhealthiness, etc.
Os. Mr. C. Hobhouse, June 6, 1225; Mr. Brodrick, 1232.
Education
O. Mr. Trevelyan, May 23, 1018.
India as a place of Custody;Ahmednagar, Unhealthiness, alleged
Os. Mr. Trevelyan, May 23, 1018; Mr. Brodrick, 1032.
St. Helena
Prisoner Shot by Sentry
Q. Mr. Bartley; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 21, 762.
O. Mr. Trevelyan, May 23, 1017.
Treatment previous to Landing at St. Helena
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 48.
Progress of the War
Os. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, May 23, 1028; Mr. Brodriek, 1034.
Punishment and Imprisonment for Breach of Military Discipline;Sleeping on Duty, Imprisonment in Civil Prisons, etc.
Qs. Mr. Lambert, Mr. Spear; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1316.
Railways, Management of
Os. Lord Lovat, May 21, 744; Lord Raglan, 747.
Services rendered by Railway Men, Acknowledgment of
Os. Mr. Broadhurst, May 23, 1027; Mr. Brodrick, 1028.
Rebels;Trial of Cape Colony Rebels, Exclusion of Reporters of "South African News"
Q. Mr. B. Roberts; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1112
Q. Mr. B. Roberts; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1315.
Refuge Camps
Cape Colony;Condition of Camps
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1108.
Treatment of Boer Women and Children;Mortality among Children, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 24, 1179.
Refugees
British Indian Refugees, Return to the Transvaal
Q. Sir M. Bhownaggree; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 14, 45.
Detention in Cape Town;Protest from Refugee Committee
Q. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 16, 238.
Remount Department, see sub-heading Horses.
Return of Troops
Number of Officers compared with Men
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1428.
Os. Mr. Pirie, June 7, 1427; Capt. Norton, 1428; Mr. Brodriek, 1429.
Roberts, Lord;Plot to Kidnap, Police Agent Gano's Connection with, etc.
Qs. Mr. S. MacNeill; As. Mr. Brodrick, May 14, 47.
Sleeping on Duty, Punishment for, see sub-heading Punishment.
Spion Kop;Soldiers' Graves, see sub- heading Graves.
Sternberg's, Count A, Book, "England's Danger"
Os. Mr. Dillon, May 14, 82; Sir J. Fergusson, May 16, 327.
Time-expired Men;Number at end of 1901
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 955.
Transport Service, see that title.
Transvaal Outlanders, Number serving in the Field
Q. Mr. T. Healy; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1111.
Typhoid Fever Statistics
Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 951.
Ventersburg;Farm Burning, see that subheading.
Vlakfontein Engagement;False Statements from the Front, Report by Reuter's Agency
Qs. Mr. Lee, Mr. E. Robertson, Mr. B. Roberts, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1320.
Volunteers
Cambridge University, Number Volunteering;Commissions offered to Members at home
Q. Mr. Moore; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1108.
Colours for Corps supplying Contingents for South Africa, proposed
Q. Mr. Helme; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 21, 765.
Furlough and Month's Pay for Volunteers serving less than one year;Leeds Engineers Volunteers, Complaint
Q. Mr. Cautley; Q. Lord Stanley, May 16, 243.
Officers and Army Rank;Granting Honorary Rank
Q. Lt.-Col. Pryce-Jones; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 10, 1460.
Returned Volunteers, see title Volunteers.
War News;False information
Dearth of reliable News, Allowing Correspondents to go to the Front without reference to Politics of Journals, etc.
Qs. Mr. Dillon, Mr. Weir, Major Rasch; As. Mr. Brodrick, May 10, 1456.
Vlakfontein Engagement
Qs. Mr. Lee, Mr. E. Robertson, Mr. B. Roberts, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1320.
Warrant Officers, see sub-heading Naval Brigade.
Yeomanry, Imperial
Lindley Disaster, see that sub-heading
Physical Tests for Officers
Q. Mr. Nussey; A. Lord Stanley, May 23, 956.
Returned Yeoman, see title Yeomanry, Transport Service, see that title.
Zulu Cattle Raids under British Authority, alleged
Q. Mr. S. Buxton; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 952.
Os. Mr. Bryce, May 23, 1022; Mr. Brodrick, 1032.
South Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railways Bill
l. 3R., May 14, 3.
c. 1R. * May 17, 439.
South Essex Water Bill
l. 3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
South Lancashire Tramways Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, May 17, 397.
3R. * May 21, 722.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill
c. Report, * May 14, 40.
Con. * May 21, 757.
South Western and Isle of Wight Junction Railway Bill
c. 1R. * May 14, 126.
South Yorkshire Electric Power Bill
c. Report, * May 23, 949.
Southampton
Ordnance Survey Assistants;Reduction in Number, Expenses of Moving, etc.
Q. Sir B. Simeon; A. Mr. Haubury, June 7, 1325.
Southampton and Winchester Great Western Junction Railway Bill
c. Report, * May 24, 1104.
Con. * June 10, 1450.
Southport Water (Transfer) Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 398.
c. 1R. * May 20, 576.
Sovereign's Oath on Accession Bill
Petitions, May 15, 173; May 16, 235; May 17, 440; May 21, 759 Jun, 6, 1211; June 7, 1313; June 10, 1453
Spain
Trade Reports Presented, May 17, 400; June 10, 1441.
Sparks
Compensation for Damage to Crops, etc., Bill, see that title.
Speaker;Rt. Hon. W. C. Gully [Carlisle]
Conduct of the Chair;Member out of Order in discussing Conduct of the Chair, May 14, 162.
Chairman of Committees was in exactly the same position as the Speaker, May 14, 162.
Member arguing to the House upon Speaker's Ruling, May 14, 121.
Derby Day Adjournment;Ruling, alleged, May 23, 1004.
Irrevelant Observations
Army Organisation Debate, May 14, 115, 118, 119, 120.
Discussing Merits of Bill which was on the Order Paper, May 23, 994, 995, 999.
Notice of Motion on the Paper
Discussing Subject embodied in Motion on Paper on a Motion for the Adjournment of the House for Recess, May 23, 1011, 1012.
Withdrawal of Motion for the purpose of a particular day, May 23, 1011.
Questions
Complaint as to the Way in which a Question appears on the Paper, June 7, 1330.
Member putting Question which stands in the name of another Member, May 21, 763.
Spear, Mr. J. W. [Devon, Tavistock]
Income Tax Surveyors;Insufficient Number, June 7, 1338.
South African War;Sleeping on Duty, Number of Military Convicts in Dartmoor Prison, June 7, 1316.
Speeches in Parliament
Limiting to Twenty Minutes.
Motion (Sir J. Dimsdale), May 14, 127.
(for Details of Debate, see Duration of Speeches.)
Spencer, Earl of
China, Situation in, May 21, 726.
Habitual Drunkards' Bill, com., May 17, 404.
Licensing Boards Bill, 2R., May 14, 23; com., May 17, 418, 419.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Committee of Inquiry, May 21, 754.
Spencer, Rt. Hon. C. R. [Northants, Mid]
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill, 2R., May 17, 431.
Spirits
Illicit Distillation, see Distillation
Squire v. Sweeney
see Truck Acts.
Stamps
see Postage Stamps.
Stanhope, Earl
Habitual Drunkards' Bill, Com., May 17, 413.
Rifles;New Pattern Service Rifle, Comparison with German Rifles, etc., May 20, 566, 568.
Stanley, Lord;Financial Secretary to the War Office (Lancashire, West Houghton)
Aldershot Sewage Farm, Expenditure on, May 24, 1171, 1177.
Chaplains:
Hong Kong;Appointment, etc., May 16, 247.
Royal Arsenals, Salaries;Denominations, etc., June 6, 1290.
Compassionate Allowances
Death of Private J. Addis, May 21, 964.
Hannah, Private, May 23, 955.
Garrison Battalions
Malta and Gibraltar;Consulting Governments of Malta, etc., May 20, 585.
Horses, System of Purchasing, Corrupt Practice by British Officers, alleged;Inquiry, June 6, 1253, 1265.
King's Bastion. Portsmouth;Destruction, May 20, 586.
Medical Corps
Committee of Experts, Appointment of, May 17, 442.
Report of Committee, May 20, 585.
Militia:
Competitive Examination, Date of, etc., June 10, 1461.
Disembodiment;Ascertaining wishes of embodied Battalions, May 20, 585.
Officers' Pass School Certificate, Local Instruction for, May 16, 244.
Wicklow Artillery Militia;Training at Cork, May 24, 1115.
Night Schools of Instruction for Auxiliary Officers, Holding at the Tower, proposed, May 24, 1115.
Pay, Private Soldiers'
Deduction for Recreation, etc., May 16, 245.
Details showing how the amount of Thirty Shillings is arrived at, May 16, 245.
Queensferry, North, Fortifications;Boundary Fence, May 17, 443.
Recruits
Age Regulations, May 20, 584.
Physical Standards;Number of Specials enlisted in 1901, May 21, 765.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 88.
Regimental Titles;Naming Regiments after Colonies which had sent Troops to South Africa. May 20, 583.
Salisbury Plain;Drainage and Sewage of New Barracks, Damage to Roads, etc., May 24, 1171.
South African War
Allotments of Soldiers;Non-payments to Wives, etc., May 20, 582.
Carrington's, Maj.-Gen. Sir F., Appointment to Command;Selection by War Office, etc., May 16, 243.
Casualty Lists, Inclusion of Temporary Losses by Capture in, etc., May 16, 239.
Farm-burning by the British;De Wet's. Gen., Farm, etc., May 16, 242.
Graves of Soldiers at Spion Kop, Neglected Condition of, alleged, May 16, 239.
Hartebeestefontein, Destruction of, May 16, 242.
Hoopstad, Isolation of;Evacuation' etc., May 16, 241.
Horses
Purchase of
Reduction in Estimate, Reasons for, June 6, 1274, 1275.
Superiority of English Horses, Number of Horses sent to S. Africa, etc., June 6, 1258, 1259, 1268.
Return of Horses after the War, June 7, 1433.
Transport of Horses
Fittings on Transports, Government Regulations, June 6, 1241.
Wastage;Lack of Veterinary Care, etc., June 6, 1275.
Invalided Soldiers' Pensions and Allowances;Number reconsidered since March 18, etc., May 21, 764.
Lichtenburg Garrison, Siege, May 16, 242.
Militia;Age Regulations, May 23, 954.
Officers' Home Passages;Case of Capt Maxwell, Refunding Cost of Passage, proposed, May 24, 1113.
Paardeberg, Strength of British Force, May 14, 84.
Volunteers;Returned Volunteers, Discharge, Furlough and Pay, June 10, 1459.
Leeds Engineer Volunteers, May 16, 243.
Worcesters, Second;Number of Sick in April, 1900, May 23, 951.
Yeomanry, Imperial
Officers, Physical Tests for, May 23, 956.
Pay, Claims of returned Yeomen, June 10, 1460.
Suffolk Rifle Association;Allowances for Empty Cartridge Cases, May 16, 246.
Transport Service;"Tagus," Disembarkation of Troops at Gosport, Complaints as to Commissariat Arrangements, May 16, 240.
Volunteers
Irish Volunteers drilling with Regulars in Dublin;Expenses incurred, etc., June 10, 1461.
Officers
Camp allowance, May 20, 584.
Pass School Certificates, Local Instruction for, May 16, 244.
War Office Organisation Committee Report;Date of Presentation, May 16, 245.
Yeomanry, West Somerset;Permission to train at Taunton revoked, etc., May 17, 443.
Steamship Subsidies
Select Committee
Instruction to Committee [Mr. W. F. Lawrence] May 2, 720; May 23, 1099.
Member discharged and Member added to Committee, May 17, 463.
Nominations, May 14, 65.
Stepney and Poplar Roads
Maintenance of;London County Council repudiating Liability, alleged
Q. Mr. H. Samuel; A. Mr. Long, May 21, 775.
Sternberg, Count A.
"England's Danger";Book written by Count A Sternberg
Os. Mr. Dillon, May 14, 82; Sir J. Fergusson, May 16, 327.
Stevenson, Mr. F. P. [Suffolk, Eye]
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1489.
Stewart, Sir Mark [Kirkcudbright]
Post Office Department, Sunday Labour, etc., June 7, 1358.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1484.
Stock Farms
Africa, South, see South African Settlement
Stockport Corporation Water Bill
Order appointing certain Lords the Select Committee to consider Bill discharged, May 14, 9.
Stoney's. Mr. V., Estate
Sale to Congested Districts Board;Seaweed Bights
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 456.
Stornoway
Mail Service
Cost, etc.
Os. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 7, 1392, 1404; Mr. Weir 1403, 1405.
Mail Steamer Service vi&#x00E2; Mallaig;Result of Experiment
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 7, 1328.
Strabane
Urban County District, Division into Wards;Order presented, June 10, 1453.
Strachey, Mr. E. [Somerset, S.]
Milk and Butter Standards, Fixing, June 7, 1326.
Outdoor relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, com., June 6, 1306.
Volunteer Rifle Ranges, Government Provision of, June 6, 1301.
Strangford
Dispensary District;Compelling Guardians to appoint properly qualified Midwife
Q. Mr. W. Johnston; Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 979.
Stratford-on-Avon
Parliamentary By-Election;New Writ, June 10, 1455.
Stroud Gas Bill
c. 3R* May 14, 37.
l. 1R* May 17, 399.
Style's, Sir W., Estate
Sale to Tenants;Fee for Land Certificate
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 977.
Sudley, Lord
Sat first in Parliament after the death of his father, May 21, 721.
Suez Canal
Shipping and Tonnage;Returns presented, June 6, 1212.
Suffolk Rifle Association
Allowance for Empty Cartridge Cases
Q. Mr. F. W. Wilson; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 246.
Sugar
Additional Duty;Budget Proposal
Classification of Sugar;Board of Trade Returns
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 16, 251
Glucose
Customs and Excise Duties, Inequality of
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 10, 1464.
English-made Glucose, Delay in Leving Duty, etc.
Q. Mr. Bartley; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 251.
Supplementary Budget Statement (Sir M. H. Beach), June 10, 1476.
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 627; May 23, 1055.
Increased Charges by Dealers
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 17, 450.
Molasses
Cattle-feeding;Reduction of Duty, proposed
Q. Mr. Charles M'Arthur; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 250.
Supplementary Budget Statement (Sir M. H. Beach), June 10, 1475.
Peppermint Creams;Delay in levying Duty, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 16, 250.
Sunday Opening of Museums
Engagement of Officials
Q. Col. Milward; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 975.
Superannuation
Civil Service, see that title.
Elementary School Teachers (Isle of Man);Rules Presented, June 6, 1214.
Supply
Army Estimates, see that title.
Business of the House;Precedence of Government Business over Business of Supply
Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), May 24, 1133.
Civil Service and Revenue Departments Estimates
Charity Commission, England and Wales;£;21, 650, Com., May 17, 483; Rep. * May 20, 718.
Friendly Societies' Registry;£;5, 019, Com*. May 17, 504; Rep. * May 20, 718.
Inland Revenue Department;£;1, 221, 713, Com., June 7, 1335; Rep., June 10, 1553.
Lunacy Commission, England;£;9,962, Com.* May 17, 504; Rep. * May 30, 719.
Mint, including Expenses of Coinage, £;91, Com., May 17, 504; Rep.* May 20, 719.
National Debt Office, Salaries and Expenses;£;7, 107, Com., May 17, 517; Rep.* May 20, 719.
Post Office Packet Service;£;571,085 Com. * June 7, 1403; Rep., June 10, 1554.
Post Office Services;£;5, 528, 810, Com., June 7, 1357; Rep., June 10, 1554.
Privy Council Department;£;7, 300, Com., May 17, 463; Rep.* May 20, 718.
Public Works Loan Commission;£;4, Com. * May 17, 531; Rep. * May 20, 719.
Record Office;£;12, 938, Com., May 17 523; Rep. * May 20, 719.
Registrar-General's Office, England;£;36,430, Com. * May 17, 531; Rep. * May 20, 719.
Works and Public Buildings Office;£;33,450, Com., May 17, 531; Rep. * May 20, 719.
Procedure
Amendments;No Member should be allowed to speak twice
O. Mr. Cripps, May 14, 146.
Carrying over unexpended Balances, etc.;see title, Army Estimates.
Form of presenting Estimates, Complaints as to;Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 504.
Friday Sittings;Adjournment of the House after Supply had been disposed of, Irish Members' Protest
Os. Mr. T. M. Healy, Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 532.
Motion for Reduction exceeding amount of Vote asked for
Debate in Com. of Supply, May 17, 507.
Parliamentary Control;Army Ordnance Factory Vote, Munitions, supplied to India and the Colonies
Os. Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1283.
Reports, Stating on the Orders of the Day particular Votes to be Reported
Qs. Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. J. Ellis, Mr. G. Bowles, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 14, 63.
Unexpended Balances, Lack of Detail, etc.;Army Estimates, see that title.
Supreme Court
see Law Courts.
Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) Bill
l. 1R. * May 21, 725.
Sutton-in-Ashfield Urban District (Water) Bill
c. 2R. * May 22, 881.
Swanage Gas and Water Bill
c. Con. * May 17, 436.
1R. * May 21, 756.
l. 1R. * May 21, 723.
Swindon
Rifle Ranges, Closing
Os. Marquess of Ailesbury, Lord Raglan, May 17, 422.
Synnott, Dr.
Fee for attendance at Dodder Inquest
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 23, 981.
"Tagus"
Disembarkation of Troops at Gosport;Commissariat Arrangements, Com plaints, etc.
Qs. Mr. S. MacNeill; As. Lord Stanley, May 16, 240.
T
Tangier
Trade Report Presented, May 21, 725.
Taunton
West Somersetshire Yeomanry;Revocation of Training Order
Q. Col. Welby; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 244; Q. Col. Welby; A. Lord Stanley, May 17, 443.
Taxation
Collections in England and Scotland;Delay in collecting Taxes in England
Q. Mr. M'Crae; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 23, 961.
(see also title Income Tax).
"Free Breakfast Table"
O. Mr. Han bury, May 21, 803.
Local Taxation, see that title.
Sugar Tax, Coal Duty, etc., see those titles.
War Taxation, Method of Raising;Providing for Peace Deficit, etc.
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 623; May 21, 807.
Taxes
Surveyors, Deficiency in Numbers;Formation of New Districts, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 7, 1335, 1337, 1338, 1341.
Taylor, Mr. T. O. [Lancashire, Radcliffe]
Chaplains in Royal Arsenals, Salaries, Denominations, etc., June 6, 1290, 1296.
Demise of the Crown Bill, Com., May 24, 1149.
Privy Council Officials, Duties, etc., May 17, 480.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill;Facilities for passing, etc., May 23, 987.
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal, June 10, 1488.
Teachers;Security of Tenure, Legislation proposed, May 23, 988.
Tea Planters, India
Liquor and Opium Shops;Location in Coolie Villages attached to plantations;Planters' Complaints
Os. Lord Kinnaird, May 20, 569; Earl of Hardwicke, 570.
Teachers
see Education.
Technical Instruction
Act of 1889;Minutes sanctioning Subjects to be taught under Clause 8, May 21, 725, 760.
Foreign Competition;Competition with United States, etc.
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 653.
Ireland;Repeal Clause of Educational Bill, Effect of, etc.
Q. Mr. Loyd; A. Mr. G. Lawsoc, May 17, 460.
Soldiers;Education of Soldiers for Civil Life
Debate (Lords), May 20, 556.
(see also Education;Secondary and Technical Education).
Tees Valley Water Board Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 722.
Telegrams
Dublin, Registry of Deeds Office;Delivery of Telegrams to Searchers
Q. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 21, 783.
Misdirected Telegrams;Postmasters giving Information respecting Telegrams, Case at Grosmont
Q. Mr. M'Keuna; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 21, 777.
Receipts, Charge for
O. Mr. H. Heaton, June 10, 1559.
Telegraph Service
Central Telegraph Office;Meal Reliefs,. Case of Clerk employed on Dublin Wire
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 973.
Public Holidays;Granting Telegraphists Day's Leave on May 24
Qs. Mr. Hay, Sir F. Evans; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 972.
Punishment for errors;Employment of Learners, etc.
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 20, 597.
Telephone Service
Dublin Operators' Wage Grievances
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 984.
London Post Office Service
Date of Completion, Unloading Materials at night, etc.
Qs. Mr. Banbury, Mr. Bartley; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 16, 263. Os. Mr. Weir, June 7 1391; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1393.
Temperance Reform
King's Speech, proposal
Os. Lord Rosebery, Marquess of Salisbury, May 14, 31, 32, 33.
Tendring Hundred Water Bill
l. 1R., * May 14, 9.
2R., * May 21, 722.
Tennant, Mr. H. J. [Berwickshire]
Children leaving School;Returns as to Number reaching age of fourteen, Number obtaining Labour and Merit Certificates, Scotland, May 16, 259.
Herrings, Destruction of, at Kinsale;Glut in Local Markets, May 16, 269.
Truck Acts;Remission of Fines, Case of Squire v. Sweeney, etc., May 17, 451.
Thames Deep Water Dock Bill
l. 2R. * May 17, 398.
Thomas, Mr. A. [Glamorgan, E.]
Finance Bill, 2R., May 21, 821.
Thomas, Mr. D. A. [Merthyr Tydvil]
Transports;Demurrage on Hired Transports, June 7, 1320.
Thomas, Mr. F. Freeman- [Hastings]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 102.
Thompson, Dr. E. C. (Monaghan, N.)
Monaghan Postal Arrangements;Triweekly Delivery of Letters at Swan's Cross, May 24, 1122.
Tied Houses Abolition Bill
Petitions, June 10, 1453.
"Times"
Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom Returns;Inaccuracy of the Budget Estimates
References to, in Debate on the Finance Bill, May 20, 616.
Tithe-Rent (Rates) Act
Removal;Form of Bill
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 17, 460.
Tomlinson, Mr. W. E. M. (Preston)
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Provision of;Improving Facilities for Shooting, etc., June 6, 1303.
Torrington and Okehampton Railway Bill
c. Report, * May 17, 437.
Con., * May 24, 1103.
3R., * June 7, 1311.
l. 1R., * June 10, 1438.
Tottenham and Hampstead Railway Junction Bill
c. Con., * May 17, 436.
3R., * May 21, 756.
l. 1R., * May 21, 723.
Tower
Night Schools of Instruction for Auxiliary Officers, proposed
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Lord Stanley, May 24, 1115.
Trade, Board of
President;Rt. Hon. G. W. Balfour.
Parliamentary Secretary;Earl of Dudley.
P. &amp; O. Steamers Crew Accommodation;Action against Company, etc.
References to, in Debate in Committee of Supply, June 7, 1409, 1410, 1413, 1415, 1416, 1417, 1419.
Trade Reports Presented
Annual Series May 16, 236; May 17, 400, 440; May 20, 540, 570; May 21, 725; May 23, 950; June 6, 1212; June 7, 1314; June 10, 1441, 1442, 1455.
Miscellaneous Series, June 6, 1212; June 7, 1314; June 10, 1441.
Trade and Commerce
Foreign Competition
American and German Competition
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 653, 714; May 21, 789
Iron and Steel Industry, see that title.
Railway Materials;British Government placing Orders in United States, Defects of Locomotives, etc.
Hickman, Sir A. M. on, May 23, 1024.
Trade Union Congress
Duration of Speeches
O. Major Rasch, May 14, 132.
Training Colleges
Scotland;Reports and Papers for 1900 Presented, June 6, 1212.
Tramways
Housing of the Working Classes Problem;Government Pledges
Q. Mr. Chaplin; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 609.
Tramways Orders Confirmation (No. 2) Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 724.
Transport Service
South African War
Cost of Transport
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1221, 1223, 1230.
Demurrage on Hired Transports
Qs. Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. D. A. Thomas; As. Mr. Brodrick June 7, 1319.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1226, 1233, 1234, 1238.
Horses
Fittings on Vessels
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1227, 1229, 1241.
Veterinary Surgeons on Transports
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1270, 1275.
Imperial Yeomanry;"Lusitania"
Os. Mr. Hayter, Mr. Brodrick, June 6, 1225, 1229.
Name, Tonnage, and Speed, Date and Port of Deoarture and Arrival at Port of Destination of each Vessel sent to South Africa, 1900, 1901;Return Ordered, May 21, 761.
Number of Men and Horses sent to South Africa, etc.
O. Sir J. Colomb, May 14, 109.
"Tagus";Disembarkation of Troops at Gosport, Complaints as to Commissariat Arrangements
Qs. Mr. S. MacNeill; As. Lord Stanley, May 16, 240.
Transport and Remounts
Vote for, June 6, 1220.
Transvaal
British Indian Subjects
Allowing Refugees to return to the Transvaal
Q. Sir M. Bhownaggree; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 14, 45.
Invalidating Boer Regulations
Q. Sir M. Bhownaggree; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1113.
Concessions Commission Reports
Date of Issue
Q. Mr. Bayley; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 17, 441: Q. Mr. A. Elliot; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 7, 1319.
Report Presented, June 7, 1313; May 10, 1443, 1454.
Financial Position;Contributions towards Cost of the War
Os. Mr. Hanbury, May 21, 808; Mr. Morton, May 23, 1067, Mr. J. Morley, 1079.
Barbour's, Sir D., Report presented, June 7, 1314; June 10, 1443, 1454.
Taxation of Gold Mines
Q. Mr. Ashton; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1112.
Gold Production 1897&#x2013;1899
Q. Mr. Moss; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 23, 956.
Jameson Raid, see that title.
Native Labour Question
Chinese Labour, Introduction of;Government Control, Poll Tax on Chinese in Australasia
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J- Chamberlain, May 14, 46
Formation of Syndicate to obtain, Black Labour for the Mines.
O. Mr. Broadhurst, May 23 1027
Uitlanders
Number serving in the Field
Q. Mr. T. Healy; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 24, 1111.
Refugees Committees' Protest against Detention in Cape Town, etc.
Qs. Mr. S. MacNeill; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 16, 238.
Trawling
Louth, Co.;Re enacting disallowed Bye-law, proposed
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Atkinson, May 21, 781.
Treacle
Sugar Duty, see that title;Molasses.
Treasury
First Lord;Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour. Financial Secretary;Mr. A. Chamberlain.
Government Property, Payment in lieu of Rates;Valuer, salary, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1289, 1295.
Post Office Profits;Treasury control an obstacle to the Development of the Post Office
Qs. Mr. J. Dewar, June 7, 1368; Mr. J. Hope, 1373; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1392; June 10, 1576.
Trevelyan, Mr. C. P. [York, W. R. Elland]
Boer Prisoners, Shooting of Prisoner at St. Helena, Prisoners sent to Stations in India, etc., May 23, 1017.
Trinidad
Education;Closing Government Schools, etc.
Q. Mr. C. Rickett; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, May 17, 445.
Trout Fishing Annual Close Time [Scotland] Bill
Petitions May 16, 235; June 10, 1453.
Truck Acts
Squire v. Sweeney, Remission of Fines;Cases in Cornwall, etc.
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 11, 451
Tuberculosis
Condemnation of Carcases;Statement of late Officer of Health for London
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Long, May 23, 964.
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. E. [Essex, S. E.]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, May 16, 335.
Tuke, Sir J. [Edinburgh and St. Andrew's Universities]
Army Medical Corps
Appointment of Committee of Experts, May 17, 441
Report of Committee, May 20, 584
Tullamore
Quarter Sessions;Judge discharging Jury, Fine, etc.
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 10, 1471.
Tully, Mr. J. [Leitrim, South]
Boyle Town Commissioners
Bye Laws, May 20, 605.
Fair and Market Regulations, May 21, 782.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
Pensions, May 17, 457.
Sheridan, Serjeant, Dismissal;Case of Daniel McGoohan, May 14, 59.
Croydon Brawling Case, May 21, 772.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament, Limiting to Twenty Minutes, May 14, 163.
Legal Procedure (Ireland) Bill, 2R., May 15, 208.
Pensions Commutation Board, Salary of Actuary;Mr. Dynham, etc, May 17, 516.
Steamship Subsidies Select Committee;Motion for Instruction to Committee, May 20, 720.
Turkey
Crete, see that title.
Massacre of Christians by Kurds at Mosul Qs. Mr. Yoxall, Mr. Flynn; As. Visc. Cranborne, May 17, 445.
Postal Service;Turkish attempt to abolish Foreign Post Offices
Q. Mr. Heaton; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 16, 248.
Os. Lord Newton, Marquess of Lansdowne, May 21, 726.
Right of Maintaining Post Offices;Treaties, etc.
Q. Mr. G. Bowles; A. Visc. Cranborne, May 17, 446.
Tweedmouth, Lord
Army Reform Proposals;Six Army Corps, Training Soldiers, Reductions from Pay, &amp;c., May 21, 750.
Habitual Drunkards Bill, Com., May 17, 415.
Rifles;New Pattern Service Rifle, Comparison with German Rifles, etc., May 20, 567.
South African War, Conduct of the War;Maps, Remounts, etc, May 21, 748
Twelve o'Clock Rule
Exemption from Standing Order
Army Organisation Resolution
Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), May 16, 278
Constant Suspension
O. Mr. G. Bowles, May 23, 1007.
Tyne Police
Refusal of Certificate to;Correspondence Presented, May 22, 883
Tyneside Tramways and Tramroads Bill
l. 3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R. * May 21, 848.
Typewriters
Civil Service, Female Typists in;Nomination of Candidates, Memorandum of September 14th
Q. Mr. T. Healy; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 23, 975.
Typhoid Fever
South African War;Number of Cases and Deaths
Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 23, 951.
Tyrone
Crown Appointments, Legal and Judicial, Roman Catholics holding, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 268.
U
Uganda
Railway, Date of Completion;Laying Report on the Table
Q. Mr. B. Jones; A. Vis. Cranborne, May 16, 248.
Travellers, British Officials Entertaining, Complaints;Sir H. Johnston's Despatch Presented, May 20, 540, 578.
Uist, South
Congestion in;Crofters threatening to take possession of Farm of Bornish, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, May 23, 970.
Ulster
Labourers' Acts, Administration
O. Mr. Macartney, May 22, 901.
Union of Benefices
see Benefices.
United Irish League
see Ireland.
United Service Institute
Duration of Speeches
O. Major Rasch, May 14, 132.
United States
Army;Pay, Soldiers' Privileges, etc.
Os. Mr. A. Lee, May 14, 74; Mr. Brodrlck, May 16, 303.
Bond-Blaine Convention, see title Newfoundland.
National Expenditure
O. Mr. Cohen, May 20, 670
Railway Materials;British Covernment placing Orders in America, Defects of Locomotives, etc.
Hickman, Sir A., on, May 23, 1024.
Trade Reports Presented, June 10, 1442.
Trade and Commerce;Competition with Great Britain
Finance Bill Debate, May 20, 653.
University Education, Ireland
see Ireland.
University Volunteers
see Cambrdge University.
V
Vacation of Seat on Acceptance of Office
Demise of the Crown Bill, see that title.
Vaccination
Glasgow;Expenditure by Corporation, Return Presented, June 6, 1213.
Valuation of Property, Ireland
see Ireland.
Ventersburg
Farm-Burning, see South African War.
Veterinary Department, Army
see Army.
Vincent, Sir E. [Exeter]
Finance Bill, 2R. May 20, 657.
Vincent, Sir H. [Sheffield, Central]
Lobbies, Ventilation of, June 10, 1467.
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Government provision, June 6, 1302.
Vivisection
Number of Experiments under Licences in 1900;Address for Return, May 23, 950;Presented, May 24, 1105.
Voluntary Schools
Associations under. Amounts of Aid Grant paid to Associated and Un-associated Schools;List Presented, June 10, 1443, 1454.
Petition for Alteration of Law, May 22, 882.
Subscriptions to Denominational Schools;Return, Publication of
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 6, 1215.
Volunteers
Cadet Corps, see that title.
Colours for Corps supplying Contingents for South African War, proposed
Q. Mr. Helme; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 21, 765.
Irish Volunteers, Drilling with Regulars in Dublin;Expenses incurred, Religion of Volunteers, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 10, 1461.
London Irish Volunteers;Resignation of O'Sullivan owing to King's Declaration, Fines imposed, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 21, 766.
Officers
Camp Allowance
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Lord Stanley. May 20, 583.
Campbell-Bannerman's Sir H. "Slur" O. Mr. A. Lee, May 14, 68.
Night Schools of Instruction, Instituting Schools at the Tower, proposed
Q. Capt,. Norton; A. Lord Stanley, May 24, 1115.
Retirement Regulations
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1114.
Training;Pass School Certificates, Local Instruction for
Q. Mr. Partington; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 244.
Pay, Training, etc.
References to, in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 76, 101.
Returned Volunteers from South Africa;Discharge, Furlough, Pay, etc.
Q. Mr. Renwick; A. Lord Stanley, June 10, 1459.
Leeds Engineer Volunteers, Complaint
Q. Mr. Cautley; A. Lord Stanley, May 16, 243.
Wiltshire Volunteer Service Company;Stoppage of War Gratuity
Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1314.
Rifle Ranges, see that title.
Welsh Regiment Volunteer Service Company;Pet Goat and Quarantine Regulations
Q. Lieut.-Col. Pryce-Jones; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 17, 442.
W
Waiters
London Restaurants;Hours of Labour, Legislation proposed
Q. Mr. K. Hardie; A. Mr. Ritchie June 7, 1323.
Wales
Colliery Disaster at Senghenydd
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Ritchie, May 24, 1118.
O. Mr. Ritchie, May 24, 1207.
County Courts, Welsh-speaking Witnesses in;Observations by Judge Bishop
Q. Mr. Phillips; A. Sir R. Finlay, June 7, 1324.
Disestablishment of the Church
Motion (Mr. O. Williams), May 21, 879.
Gold Mines;Royalties, Fees, etc.
Q. Mr. Moss; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 23, 963.
Wallace, Mr. W. E. [Perth]
Army Estimates, Lack of Detail, June 6, 1239.
Wallasey Improvement Bill
c. Report, * May 20, 574.
Walton, Mr. J. [York, W. R. Barnsley]
China;Position of Foreign Powers, Progress of Negotiations, etc., May 21, 768.
Wanklyn, Mr. J. L. [Bradford, Central]
Bradford, All Saints' School, Accommodation;Recognition for 816 Children, May 23, 967.
Want of Confidence in the Government
Attitude of the Opposition
Fowler's, Sir H., Amendment to the Finance Bill
Os. Sir H. Fowler, May 20, 631; Sir M. H. Beach, 635; Col. Milward, May 21, 830.
War
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. St. John Brodrick
Under Secretary;Lord Raglan
Financial Secretary;Lord Stanley
War News
see South African War
War Office
Kitchener's, Lord, Correspondence with
Q. Mr. Labouchere; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 7, 1317.
Organisation Committee, Report
Date of Presenting Report
Qs. Mr. E. Robertson; Capt. Norton; As. Lord Stanley, May 16, 244.
Opportunity for Discussion
Q. Mr. A. Lee; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 7, 1331.
Qs. Capt. Norton, Mr. Mather; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 10, 1473.
Report of Committee with Minutes of Evidence, Presented, May 24, 1105.
Re-writing Report
Os. Sir H. Fowler, May 20, 622; Mr. A. J. Balfour, 622.
Rates, Contribution in lieu of,
O. Mr. Goddard, June 6, 1289.
Reform
References to, in Debate on Array Reorganisation Proposals, May 14, 85, 124; May 16, 283, 295, 297.
Warner, Mr. T. Courtenay [Stafford, Lichfield]
Army
Estimates, Lack of Detail, June 6, 1240.
Expenditure on Buildings;Accommodation for Officers' Wives at Malta, Gibraltar, etc., May 24, 1165.
Garrison Battalions;Desertions, May 23, 955.
Ordnance Factories;Reserve of Manufacturing Machinery, June 6, 1283.
Charities;Disqualification of Nonconformists as Trustees, etc., May 17, 493.
Gibraltar and Malta Garrison Regiments;Barrack Accommodation for Married Men, May 24, 1201.
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers, Accommodation for, June 7, 1415, 1419.
Militia, Moving to New Quarters shortly before Embarkation for South Africa, June 6, 1221.
South African War
Horses, Reserve of, June 6, 1264.
Inquiry into, etc.;Opportunities for Discussion, May 16, 237.
Volunteer Rifle Ranges, Government Provision of, June 6, 1302.
Warden Estate
Rents;Valuators Raising Rent of P. Sullivan, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham,. May 20, 600.
Warr, Mr. A. F. [Liverpool, E. Toxteth]
Liverpool Population Estimate;Mistake in Report of Registrar-General, etc., May 23, 963.
Warships
Exportation since 1896;Return, Proposed
Q. Mr. Jacoby; A. Mr. G. Balfour, May 17, 443.
Wason, Mr. C. [Orkney and Shetland]
Afforestation in Scotland;Experiments in Highlands and Islands, May 24, 1120.
Cava, Island of;Charges borne by Parish of Orphir in respect of Island, etc., May 17, 453.
Post Office Service;Districts between Islands and Mainland of Scotland, June 7, 1370.
Wason, Mr. E. [Clackmannan and Kinross]
Allotments and Common Pastures;Proceedings of Parish and County Councils, Return, May 24, 1120.
Charity Commissioners' Schemes;Disqualification of Nonconformists, St. Cross Hospital Scheme, etc., May 17, 186.
Water Orders Confirmation (No. 1) Bill
l. 2R * May 14, 10.
Water Supply
London Water Supply, see that title.
Waterville
Granting Right to Land Emden-Ireland Cable at Waterville, proposed
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, May 17, 445.
Ways and Means Advances
Rate of Interest paid to Bank of England, 1899&#x2013;1901
Q. Mr. Lloyd; A. Sir M. H. Beach, May 24, 1116.
Ways and Means
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposals
Glucose and Molasses;Supplementary Statement (Sir M. H. Beach), June 10, 1475.
Substituting one Tax for another in Committee of Ways and Means.
Os. Mr. Labouchere, Sir H. Fowler, May 20, 663.
Weights and Measures
Metric System, see that title.
Weir, Mr. T. G. [Ross and Cromarty].
Army Ordnance Factories;Responsibility for Work, etc, June 6, 1282.
Badluachrach, Road Construction at;Application for Grant, May 23, 969.
Berwickshire County Town Bill, 2R., June 10, 1550.
Congested Districts Board;Congestion in the Highlands, Delay in taking steps to provide Land, etc., May 24, 1120; June 7, 1327.
Edinburgh, Sasine Office;System of Registration, Search Sheet, ect., May 23, 968.
Ireland Island, Military Works Expenditure, May 24, 1202.
Larceny Bill, 2R-, June 10, 1543.
P. and O. Company, Mail Contract with, June 7, 1420.
Postal Facilities in Highlands and Islands of Scotland, Grievances, June 7, 1390.
Ross-shire;Additional Postal Facilities, etc., June 6, 1217.
Secretary for Scotland;Proposed Visit to Congested Districts of Western Islands, May 23, 970.
South African War;False Statements from the Front, June 10, 1456, 1457.
Stornoway Mail Steamer Service via Mallaig;Result of Experiment, June 7, 1328.
Stornoway Packet Service;"Forty Years Old Tub," etc., June 7, 1403, 1405, 1406.
Surveyors of Taxes, Scotland;Assessing Deer Forests, June 7, 1353.
Uist, South, Crofters and Cottars Threatening to take Possession of Farm, of Bornish, etc., May 23, 970.
Welby, Lieut.-Col. A. C. [Taunton]
Army Reform and Organisation Proposals, May 16, 363.
South African War;Officers' Passage Home, Case of Capt. Maxwell, Refunding Cost of Passage, Proposed, May 24, 1113.
West Somersetshire Yeomanry;Training at Taunton, Revocation of Order, etc., May 16, 244; May 17, 443.
Wellington College
Report of Governors for 1900 Presented, May 20, 540, 577.
Wellington, Duke of
Economist;Mr. Gladstone's Opinion
References to in Debate on Finance Bill, May 20, 660, 712.
Wells Corporation Water Bill
l. 2R. * May 21, 722.
Welshmen in Patagonia
see Patagonia.
West Cumberland Electric Tramways Bill
c. Report. * May 22, 881.
Con * June 7, 1311.
West India Dock
Naval Stores, Packers' Pay
Qs. Capt. Norton; As. Mr. Arnold Forster, May 20, 586; May 21, 767.
West Indies
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposal
O. Mr. Flower, May 23, 1057.
West Surrey Water Bill
c. 3R. * May 14, 37.
l. 1R. * May 14, 9.
Weston super-Mare Gas Bill
l. 3R. * May 17, 398.
c. 1R. * May 20, 576.
Wexford County
Cadwallader Edward's Estate, delay in effecting Sale;Bill to obviate Delays, etc.
Qs. Mr. Ffrench; As. Mr. Wyndham, May 16, 269.
Land Purchase, Government Proposals;Date of introducing Bill
Qs. Mr. Ffrench, Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 17, 475.
Whitley, Mr. J. H. [Halifax]
Charitable Trust Funds, Investments, May 17, 503.
Inland Revenue Department;Cost of Estate Duty Office Staff, Accountant and Controller-General's Office Stall;"Redundant" Messengers;Reduction in Payment to Charwoman, etc., June 7, 1347.
Privy Council, Clerk of the Council;Duties, Salary, etc., May 17, 465, 469.
Supply
Form of presenting Estimate;Vote for the Mint, Complaint, May 17, 504, 507.
Motions for Reductions exceeding Amount of Vote# asked for, May 17, 509.
Whitsuntide Recess
Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), May 23, 989, 1001;;Amendment (Sir B. Gurdon), 991.
Wicklow
Artillery Militia;Training at Cork
Q. Mr. Cogan; A. Lord Stanley, May 24, 1115.
Constable Freeman;Conviction for Assault, Proposed Removal, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 24, 1124.
Wigan Corporation Tramways, etc., Bill
l. 3R. * May 20, 535.
c. 1R* May 21, 848.
Williams, Mr. Osmond [Merionethshire]
Church in Wales;Disestablishment, May 21, 879.
Wilson, Mr. A. Stanley [York, E. R. Holderness.]
Education Department Architect, Duties of Consulting Architect, May 23, 967.
Wilson. Mr. H. J. [York, W. R., Holmforth]
Post Office Employees' Grievances, Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1380.
Wilson, Mr. F. W. [Norfolk, Mid]
Suffolk Rifle Association;Allowance for Empty Cartridge Cases, May 16, 246.
Wilson, Mr. J. [Durham, Mid]
Finance Bill, 2R. May 21, 805, 806.
Soldiers;Employment of Discharged Soldiers in preference to Civilians, May 17, 518, 521.
Wilson, Mr. J. [Falkirk Burghs]
Linlithgow Procurator Fiscal;Appointment of Mr. J. Main, May 14, 53.
Wilson, Mr. J. [Glasgow, St. Rollox]
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers, June 7, 1414.
Post Office Employees' Grievances, Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1380.
Wiltshire
Charity Commission Inquiry
Q. Mr. Lawrence; A. Mr. G. Boscawen, June 10, 1467.
Volunteer Service Company from south Africa;Stoppage of War Gratuity Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Mr. Brodriek, June 7, 1314.
Winchester
St. Cross Hospital, see that title.
Winchester, Bishop of
Habitual Drunkards' Bill, Com., May 17, 401, 407, 408, 412.
Licensing Sessions Bill, Com., May 17, 415, 416, 418, 419, 421.
Windsor, Lord
Licensing Boards Bill, 2R. May 14, 19.
Wine
Bonded Warehouses;Fortifying Wine Duty charged, etc.
Qs. Mr. J. O'Connor, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Sir M. H. Beach, May 23, 960; May 24, 1117.
Winsford Urban District [Gas Transfer, etc.] Bill
c. 1R. * May 15, 169.
Wisbech Water Bill
l. Report, * May 20, 534.
Women
School Inspectors, see Education;In-spectors.
Woolwich
Ordnance Forging Press;Construction, Progress of Work, etc.
O. Mr. Stuart-Wortley, June 6, 1290.
Woolwich Dockyard
Technical Instruction of Soldieis Experiment, Reasons for failure, etc.
Os. Lord Monkswell, May 20, 558, 556; Lord Raglan, 563.
Worcesters, Second
South African War;Number of Sick in April, 1900
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Lord Stanley, May 23, 951.
Workhouses
Granard Union;Employment of Trained Nurse, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, May 20, 601.
Workmen's Compensation Act
Administration;Assessment of average Weekly Wage, Definition of Term "Week"
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 7, 1324.
Workmen's Houses Tenure Bill
Petitions, May 16, 235.
Workmen's Trains
Foreign Countries;Workmen's Locomotion Facilities;Return Presented, June 6, 1212.
Housing of the Working Classes Problem;Government Pledges
Q. Mr. Chaplin; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, May 20, 609.
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. Stuart [Sheffield, Hallam]
Post Office Employees' Grievances;Appointment of Committee of Inquiry, June 7, 1387.
Private Members' Time;Government Time on Supply practically was Private Members' Time, May 24, 1191.
Pro, Boer Speeches and the Belgian Newspapers, May 24, 1191.
Woolwich;Forging Press, Construction of, June 6, 1290.
Wrightson, Sir T. [St. Pancras, E.]
Finance Bill, 2R. May 21, 786.
Wye
South Eastern Agricultural College;Forestry Lectures, Number of Students attending
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 14, 53.
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. G.;Chief Secretary for Ireland [Dover]
Achonry;Meeting, Police Interference, May 14, 57; May 16, 265.
Agrarian Outrages;Return, Number of threatening Notices, May 21, 781.
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Department
Loans to Farmers, May 17, 455.
Cork Dairy Industry;Loans for Separators, June 10, 1469.
Munster, Agricultural Instruction in;Mallow Conference, May 20, 601.
Allotments in Urban Districts;Legislation proposed, May 23, 981.
Analyst, Government;Appointment proposed, May 16, 266.
Army;Training of Generals and Staff May 16, 319.
Birr and Portumna Railway, Restoring, etc;Government Advance, May 16, 274.
Butter, Foreign, Sold in Irish Pyramid Boxes;Prosecutions, etc., May 14, 60.
Cavan Old Prison, Handing over to Military Authorities, May 21, 778.
Census Returns
Number of Irish-speaking People in Ireland, May 17, 457.
Population of Ireland, May 20, 606.
Connaught;Scheduling as Congested District, proposed, June 7, 1330.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
Freeman, Constable, Removal from Wicklow, May 24, 1125.
Herbert Estate Conference;Attendance of Police from Beaufort, June 10, 1469.
Kenmare Constabulary and Harvest Work;Assisting District Inspector, May 21, 778.
Killarney House;Police Protection, June 10, 1468.
Newport, Co. Mayo;Number of Police, Religion, etc., June 10, 1471
Pensions, May 17, 457.
Re-armament, etc., May 14, 58; May 16, 268.
Retirement Regulations, Recruiting, etc., May 16, 271.
Retirements on Pension;Powers of Inspector-General to compel Constables to Retire, May 23, 979.
Sheridan's, Sergeant, Dismissal from, Case of Daniel McGoohan, May 14, 59.
Viceregal Commission, Names and Positions of Members, etc., May 16, 272.
Coroners' Inquests, Medical Fees at;Fee paid to Dr. Synnott, May 23, 282.
Crown Appointments, Roman Catholics holding, in Derry, Tyrone, and Donegal, May 16, 268.
Education
Books and the Marl borough Street Stores;Bookbinders' Society's Complaint, etc., May 16, 273.
Intermediate Education Examinations;Programme and Rules for 1902, May 17, 456.
Evictions
Clanricarde Estate;Cost incurred by Government, May 16, 274.
Notices;Return, proposed Legislation, May 23, 976.
Fishery Loans;Amended Rules, May 21, 779.
Granard Union Workhouse;Employment of Trained Nurse, etc., May 20, 601.
Gun Licenoes;Refusal to grant Licence to P. Masterson, June 10, 1470.
Herrings, Destruction of, at Kinsale;Glut in Local Markets, May 16, 269.
Industrial Schools
Application to commit C. Miller to Strabane Industrial School, May 23, 979.
Committals, Reduction in Number;Compensation to Managers, proposed, May 20, 604.
Irish Language
Teaching of, in Irish Schools, May 21, 869.
Training Colleges and Professors of Irish Language;Marlborough Street College Disadvantages, June 6, 1217.
Kearon, T., Case of;Street Preaching at Arklow, Conviction for Assault, etc. May 24, 1125.
Kerry, Representative on Congested Districts Board, proposed;Moving Bog, June 7, 1329.
Knocallassa Grazing Farm Disturbance;Arrest of M'Guinness, etc., May 20, 604.
Labourers' Cottages
Granard Union Scheme;Re-considering Applications, etc., May 20, 602.
Longford Union, May 16, 272; May 20, 603.
Mallow;Arbitration under Labourers Acts, Refusal of Local Government Board to appoint Mr. J. Byrne as Arbitrator, May 14, 56.
Mitehelstown Union;Delay in Progress of Schemes, May 24, 1123.
Rathdrum Union;Appointment of Arbitrator, Delays, etc., May 17, 457.
Rural Auxiliary Postmen;Right to Apply for Cottages, May 23, 981.
Land Act, 1896;Section 40, Legislation proposed, May 20, 604.
Land Commission
Aranmore Island;Hearing Cases at Dungloe, May 23, 977.
Cadwallader Edwards' Estate, Delay in effecting Sale;Bill to obviate Delays, etc., May 16, 270.
Cavan County;Number of Fair Rent Appeals, etc., May 23, 980.
Finlay's Estate;Sale of Land to Tenants, May 23, 982; May 24, 1124.
Monaghan Appeals;Mr. Justice Meredith's Comments, May 16, 267.
Rent Reductions in 1900;Return proposed, May 24, 1124.
Style's, Sir W., Estate, County Donegal;Sale to Tenants, Fee for Land Certificates, May 23, 977.
Warden Estate, County Kerry;Valuators raising Rent of P. Sullivan, May 20, 600.
Land Judges' Court;Salaries of Receivers, etc., Payment out of Estates in the Court, May 20, 605.
Land Purchase;Purchase of Estates, etc., Seaweed Rights and the Purchase of Mr. Stoney's Estate, May 17, 456.
Limerick, County, Land Purchase in;Guarantee Fund under Act of 1891, Amount allocated to Limerick, May 21, 780.
Longford, County, Land Purchase in;Applications for Loans, May 20, 601.
Lunatic Asylums
Cavan and Monaghan, Expenditure on;Inquiry May 16, 267.
County Council providing Auxiliary Asylum independently of other Counties in District, June 10, 1470.
Sligo Asylum;Case of Attendant Gaffney, May 24, 1123.
Mallaranny Cattle Market;Mr. Stoney collecting Tolls and Customs, etc., June 10, 1471.
M'Clung, Mr., Clerk at Galway Gaol, attending street Preaching;Transference to Dublin, May 23, 978.
Morony, D., Case of;Arrest and Imprisonment, May 23, 980.
National School Teachers
District No. 46, Teacher, No. 8,316;Detention of Salary, etc., May 21, 781.
Salaries;Teachers examined before March, 1901, May 16, 274.
Purchase of Land (Ireland) Bill, Intro., May 20, 612.
Re-afforesting, Number of Acres for, May 16, 274.
Roads;District Labour, Employment of, Order in Council, May 24, 1126.
Rossmurrevagh;Erection of Pier, Proposed, May 24, 1122.
Strangford Dispensary District;Compelling Guardians to Appoint Properly Qualified Midwife, May 23, 980.
Tullamore Quarter Sessions;Judge Discharging Jury, Pine, etc., June 10, 1472.
Wexford Co., Land Purchase in;Date of introducing Bill, May 17, 458.
Y
Yeomanry Imperial
Colonies, Raising Force in
Os. Lord Stanley, May 14, 92; Mr. Freeman-Thomas, 106; Col. Brook-field, May 16, 353.
Equipment
Q. Mr. Peel; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1111.
Horses, Purchase in Austria-Hungary, Charges of Corruption Against British Officers;Inquiry.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 6, 1246, 1249, 1250, 1254, 1255, 1260, 1265.
"Imperial," Reasons for Retaining
Os. Lord Stanley, May 14, 91; Mr. E. Robertson, May 16, 366.
Lee, Private, Ill-treatment of, at Netley Hospital, alleged, see Netley Hospital.
Mounted Infantry, Training as;Lord Roberts' Speech at Badminton
Q. Mr. Peel; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 24, 1110.
Pay, Period of Duty, etc.
Os. Sir A. Hayter, May 16, 289; Mr. Brodrick, 306; Mr. Fuller, 334; Capt. Jessel, 341.
Returned Yeomen from South Africa;Pay Claims
Q. Col. Brookfield; A. Lord Stanley, June 10, 1460.
Rifle Ranges;Use of Rifle Ranges provided by Government
Q. Lord Harris; A. Lord Raglan, May 17, 421.
South African War, see that title.
West Somersetshire Yeomanry;Training at Taunton, Revocation of Order, etc.
Q. Col. Welby; A. Mr. Brodrick, May 16, 244.
Q. Col. Welby; A. Lord Stanley, May 17, 443.
Yerburgh, Mr. R. A. [Chester]
Army Recruits;Physical Standards, etc., May 21, 765.
China;Increase in Import Traffic, May 14, 52.
India;Army, Number of Time-expired Men, May 23, 956.
South African War;Number of Time-expired Men, May 23, 955.
Yokohama
Trade Report Presented, June 10, 1441.
Yorkshire College
Forestry Lectures, Number of Students attending
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Hanbury, May 14, 53.
Yoxall, Mr. J. H. [Nottingham, W.]
Education Inspectors
Instructions to;Date of Issue to Members, June 7, 1323.
Women Sub-Inspectors, Promotion, etc., May 20, 594.
Nottingham Postmen's Walks;Advertising Vacancies, etc., May 20, 597.
Sugar Duty;Increased Charges by Dealers, May 17, 450.
Turkey;Reported Massacre of Christians in Tiyari District, May 17, 445.
Volunteer Officers' Camp Allowance, May 20, 583.
Z
Zanzibar
Slavery in;Correspondence Presented, June 6, 1212.
Zulus
Cattle-raiding, see South African War;Zulu Cattle Raids.