<url>https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/sittings/1901/jun/26</url>
HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Wednesday, 26th June, 1901.
PRIVATE BILL BUSINESS.
CARDIFF CORPORATION BILL.
Lords' Amendments considered, and agreed to.
POULTON-LE-FYLDE GAS BILL [Lords]
PRESTATYN WATER BILL [Lords].
SHIPLEY IMPROVEMENT BILL.
As amended, considered; to be read the third time.
GAS ORDERS CONFIRMATION BILL [Lords].
Read a second time, and committed.
ELLAND GAS BILL [Lords].
Report [25th June] from the Select Committee on Standing Orders read.
Ordered, That the Bill be read a second time.;(Mr. Caldwell.)
PETITIONS.
EDUCATION BILL.
Petition from Tynemouth, against; to lie upon the Table.
Petition from Norwich, for alteration; to lie upon the Table.
EDUCATION (CONTINUATION SCHOOLS) BILL.
Petition from Tynemouth, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
FACTORY AND WORKSHOPS ACTS AMENDMENT BILL.
Petition of the Sanitary Institute, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
FACTORY AND WORKSHOP BILL.
Petition of the Sanitary Institute, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
HOUSING OF WORKING CLASSES (REPAYMENT OF LOANS) BILL.
Petition of the Sanitary Institute, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES OFFICERS' SUPERANNUATION BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Kempston; Wigan; and Tynemouth; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN BILL.
Petitions against, from Northampton; Sutton-in-Ashfield; Hyde; and Pontefract; to lie upon the Table.
Petitions in favour, from Clapham Junction; Morley; Altrincham (three); Dudley (six); Parkstone; Lansdowne; Greenhill; Camden Town; Trevadlock; Pelynt; Bristol (three); Bedminster; Horfield; Wareham; Sheffield; Dept-ford; St. Albans; Newcastle-upon-Tyne; New Annesley (two); Hucknall Huthwaite; Mansfield Woodhouse; East Kirkby (five); Kirkby-in-Ashfield (two); Sutton-in-Ashfield (seven); Warsop; Pleasley Hill; Kirkby Woodhouse; Stan-ton Hill; East Field Side; Ford (two); Halifax; Portsmouth (two); Southport; Shillington; Brighton; Bermondsey; Forest Hill; Selly Oak; Walworth (two); Fulham; Newport (Isle of Wight); East Finsbury; Hornsey; Kentish Town; Cwm Bonynaen; Northwich; Luton; Ironville; Titley; and Dundee; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN (SCOTLAND) BILL.
Petition from Largs, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
RETURNS, REPORTS, ETC.
PRISONS (ENGLAND AND WALES) (VISITING COMMITTEES).
Copy presented, of Draft Rule proposed to be made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department under the Prisons Acts, 1877 and 1898, with respect to the constitution of the Visiting committee of Borstal Prison [by Act]; to lie upon the Table.
PRISONS (ENGLAND AND WALES) (APPROPRIATION OF BORSTAL PRISON TO SELECTED CRIMINAL PRISONERS).
Copy presented, of Draft Rule proposed to be made in pursuance of Section
25 of the Prisons Act, 1877, Appropriating Borstal Prison to Selected Male Criminal Prisoners [by Act]; to lie upon the Table.
PRISONS (ENGLAND AND WALES). (RULES FOR PRISONERS BETWEEN AGES OF 16 AND 21 YEARS).
Copy presented, of Draft of Special Rules proposed to be made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department under the Prisons Act, 1898, with regard to Prisoners between the ages of 16 and 21 years [by Act]; to lie upon the Table.
GAS AND WATER ORDERS CONFIRMATION BILL.
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 25th June; Mr. Gerald Balfour]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 230.]
GAS ORDERS CONFIRMATION BILL.
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 25th June; Mr. Gerald Balfour] to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 231.]
WATER ORDERS CONFIRMATION (No. 1) BILL.
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 25th June; Mr. Gerald Balfour]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 232.]
WATER ORDERS CONFIRMATION (No. 2) BILL.
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 25th June; Mr. Gerald Balfour]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 233.]
SUPERANNUATION ACT, 1887.
Copy presented, of Treasury Minute, dated 19th June, 1901, granting to Mr. A. C. G. Cameron, Geologist, Geological Survey, Board of Education, a Retired Allowance under the Act [by Act]; to lie upon the Table.
WAYS AND MEANS.
Copy ordered, "of statement showing the Grants in Committee of Supply upon which the Resolution of the Committee of Ways and Means of 25th
June, 1901, was based.";(Mr. Austen Chamberlain.)
Copy presented accordingly; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 229.]
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN BILL.
Order for Committee read.
MR. CROMBIE (Kincardineshire) rose to move, "That the Order be discharged, and that the Bill be committed to the Standing Committee on Law." It would, he said, be out of order, or at any rate irrelevant, to discuss the merits of the Bill on this motion; the question was whether the Bill should be considered in Committee of the Whole House or in Grand Committee. He confessed that if he had had the choice he should have preferred the Bill to be threshed out on the floor of the House, because he felt confident that if a full opportunity of threshing out every Amendment were given to the Committee the Bill would have emerged from the ordeal in a shape much nearer to that in which it now stood than was likely if it went to a Grand Committee. But he thought they were not justified in asking the Government to do anything for this Bill which they would not have done had they introduced it themselves, and he felt certain that if the Bill had been theirs the Government would have sent it to a Grand Committee. Not only did he believe that the Government would have adopted that course, but if this Bill was to pass at all it must be sent to a Grand Committee, and if the House rejected his motion they would be simply killing the Bill. It had been laid down by Mr. Gladstone that Bills dealt with by Grand Committees should be of a non-party character, and he thought this Bill came within that description. He appealed to those who voted for the Second Reading;and 376 hon. Gentlemen voted for it;who by their votes certainly meant that the Bill should pass in some shape or form, to carry his motion. He wished hon. Gentlemen to be logical and rational, and not to stultify themselves by refusing to support the motion. A rumour had reached him that the argument of the recommendations of the
Royal Commission was to be used against this motion, but it was a dangerous thing to talk of a rope in the house of a man who had been hanged. The Royal Commission it was perfectly true;
*MR. SPEAKER ruled that any discussion upon the recommendations of the Royal Commission would be out of order.
MR. CROMBIE said he wished to keep entirely within the bounds of order, and he would only say that it seemed to him that the opponents of the Bill should be very chary of saying anything about the recommendations of the Royal Commission. In order to meet the opposition to the Bill certain Amendments had been introduced. He hoped that, in view of the concessions which the supporters of the Bill were prepared to make, hon. Members would vote for his motion. He begged to move.
*MR. TRITTON (Lambeth, Norwood) seconded the motion. He said that if the Bill were not sent up to the Grand Committee there would be no chance of the measure passing this session, or perhaps for many years. There was no Bill before the House which had excited a greater amount of interest. He desired to send it to the Grand Committee because he thought it had in it the making of a most useful and reasonable measure of moderate temperance reform, and because he considered that there was no Bill more worthy of being sent up to a Grand Committee than one which sought to protect the little children of our land and check at the fountain head that stream of intemperance which everybody deplored.
Moved, "That the Order for Committee be discharged, and that the Bill be committed to the Standing Committee on Law.";(Mr. Crombie.)
MR. JAMES LOWTHER (Kent, Thanet), in opposing the motion, agreed that the merits of the Bill could not now be discussed. He intended to confine his remarks to the question of procedure, and he hoped that the question of sending the Bill to a Select Committee or a Grand Committee would not be mixed up in any way with a debate upon the merits of the Bill itself. Those who had taken part or
had been interested in the discussions twenty years ago on the question of the establishment of these Committees would be familiar with the fact that it was laid down, not only by Mr. Gladstone, but by all those who took an active part in the discussion, that the reference to Grand Committees should be confined to non-contentious measures. The hon. Gentleman opposite had spoken of measures which were not of a party or political character. Mr. Gladstone unquestionably did except from his procedure measures of a party or political character, but he went far beyond that, and excepted all contentious measures. He had also used words showing that it was in his mind that a measure apparently of a non-contentious character which assumed in its passage through Grand Committee a contentious character should be committed to a Committee of the Whole House. The remarks of the hon. Gentleman who seconded the motion were evidently made in ignorance of the fact that the principle of reference to Grand Committees had been adopted on the distinct assurance that it should be applied only to non-contentious measures. Both the mover of the motion and the seconder spoke of the great public interest of the Bill, but that was a matter he would not deal with; he was only dealing with the question from the point of view of history and precedent. If the measure were sent to Grand Committee it was true all hon. Members interested would have an opportunity for discussing it, because it would come up on Report, when opinions might be freely expressed. But he had always thought that the amount of time saved by reference to Grand Committee was, under those circumstances, largely detracted from, and more especially would that be so in the case of a measure that had aroused great public interest. A great number of petitions had been presented relating to this Bill;
*MR. TRITTON: How many against?
MR. JAMES LOWTHER: I cannot tell.
*MR. TRITTON: About 4,430 petitions in favour of the Bill and only 107 against.
MR. JAMES LOWTHER: The hon. Member does not give the number of signatures, but that is a detail.
*MR. TRITTON: But I can.
MR. JAMES LOWTHER thought the hon. Member was ill-advised in raising a debate on the merits of the Bill or in challenging him to give statistics, when he was merely addressing himself to a question of procedure. The hon. Member had shown that hundreds of thousands of persons in the country were taking an interest in the Bill, and it could not, therefore, be styled a non-contentious measure. He was told that no fewer than 170 Members of that House had made application to be put upon the Grand Committee. That was ten or twelve times the number that could possibly be appointed, and it rather showed that the House wanted to consider this Bill in its collective capacity. As regarded the merits of the Bill, he had said nothing. The question they had to decide was a very serious one, which affected the whole system of procedure, and without regard at all to the merits of this particular Bill, he hoped that on these broad grounds the House would adhere to the principle already laid down, and would not create a dangerous precedent.
SIR H. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN (Stirling Burghs): The right hon. Gentleman opposite has on this occasion exposed two qualities which admirably distinguish him;an extreme accuracy of statement and perfect consistency of conduct;but the right hon. Gentleman has also posed in a character in which I and a good many others cannot altogether accept him. He has posed as the expositor of the mind of Mr. Gladstone.
MR. JAMES LOWTHER: No, I did not talk about the mind of Mr. Gladstone. I simply read his words from Hansard.
SIR H. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN: The right hon. Gentleman read Mr. Gladstone's mind into his words. The mind of Mr. Gladstone was a somewhat remarkable intellectual instrument, and I do not know anybody who is less likely
to be familiar with it than the right hon. Gentleman opposite. The right hon. Gentleman's argument was that this procedure was only intended to be applied to non-contentious business; that this was a contentious measure; and that, therefore, the procedure ought not to be applied to it. But what does the right hon. Gentleman mean to be understood by a non-contentious measure? What can be called a non-contentious measure if this is not one? It was carried on the Second Reading by a majority of between five and six to one, and even on the side of the House which the right hon. Gentleman adorns there was a majority of nearly four to one. Surely a non-contentious measure does not mean a measure in which nobody takes an interest at all! According to the definition of the right hon. Gentleman, that would be the only Bill which ought to be sent to a Grand Committee. I do not think there is anything in the contention of the right hon. Gentleman. I do not know whether the House has observed a peculiar deficiency in our constitution while this matter was being discussed. That is a Government day. His Majesty's Government have taken possession of the time of the House, and have set apart this day for a particular purpose under their guidance and instruction. But where is His Majesty's Government?
THE PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY (Sir WILLIAM WALROND, Devonshire, Tiverton) said this particular Wednesday was taken by the Government so as to enable these two Bills to be placed at the disposal of private Members.
SIR H. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN: But surely, when the Government takes that course, there should be some guidance from the Government. These are not two casual Bills picked up accidentally out of a number of private Members' Bills, but they are Bills with reference to which the Government has a policy. Hitherto we have had the advantage of the presence of the Scotch Solicitor General, of the Irish Attorney General, and of the Under Secretary for the Home Department, who, I am glad to see, has recovered from his recent
efforts to maintain order at Stratford-on-Avon. On the last occasion on which the right hon. Gentleman represented His Majesty's Government my right hon friend the Member for East Fife asked a very simple question, pertinent to the subject in hand, and entirely within the range of the Department which the right hon. Gentleman opposite represents. The right hon. Gentleman, with that good-humoured affability which always distinguished him, rose and said, "I will go and inquire," and we never saw him again.
THE UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT (Mr. JESSE COLLINGS, Birmingham, Bordesley) said the right hon. Gentleman had rather misrepresented his position. His right hon. friend the Member for East Fife asked when a certain Departmental Committee would report. It was impossible for anyone who was not a Member of the Committee to answer the question, and, wishing to obtain the information for his right hon. friend, he went to consult the Departmental Committee at the Home Office. Thinking that his right hon. friend wished genuinely for the information, as soon as he had obtained it he communicated it to him. That was the whole story.
SIR H. CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN: I am extremely glad to have elicited this information and an explanation of what has previously been a mystery, but I hope the right hon. Gentleman will not confine himself to giving the information to my right hon. friend, because the House also would like the information. But on this occasion I assume that the right hon. Gentleman is in the House, not only for the purpose of having questions addressed to him and of going to the Home Office to inquire, but of stating, on the part of His Majesty's Government, the policy they mean to pursue with regard to these Bills. I have not completed my category. There was also on the Treasury Bench the Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs, whose thoughts were no doubt in China; and then there was the Secretary to the Treasury, whose particular function is to be most useful to the Government in the House and to be kind and courteous
to hon. Members of the House, but whose main purpose is to remain dumb while other people speak. But, seriously, I do not think we should be allowed to discuss this question without any intimation at all of the feeling of the Government in regard to it, and I hope that before the debate has gone much further we shall be honoured by the presence of someone capable of instructing the House upon the subject.
*EARL PERCY (Kensington, S.) said he did not intend to raise any objection to sending the Bill to a Committee upstairs, because he was in favour of the Bill and had voted for the Second Reading, and he agreed that it would be impossible to pass it this session if it was to be taken in Committee of the Whole House. At the same time, he thought it would be very undesirable for the promoters of the Bill to labour under any misconception as to the degree of unanimity which was likely to prevail in the House when the Bill came down from the Committee and was taken on the Report stage. There were two classes of Bills which were sent up to a Select Committee. The one class was composed of non-contentious measures, which everybody wished to see passed, and as to the principle of which everyone was agreed, and the other of Bills which no one desired but for which it was desirable to provide a decent burial, and which were, therefore, sent upstairs to the private crematorium. This Bill was not of that character. Undoubtedly the Bill had evoked a considerable amount of favourable feeling in the country, and it passed its Second Reading by an overwhelming majority, but it by no means followed that therefore it was a non-contentious measure. In one sense the Bill was a very contentious one, and the principle for which they voted was quite different from that embodied in the Amendments certain to be moved in Committee upstairs, on which many of them would not be represented. One matter, the penalising of parents, was of great interest indeed. In voting for the Bill he did so on the plain ground that the liquor trade was a monopoly, and under the statutes of Parliament they had the right to deal with it, and there-fore they had the right to provide that
intoxicating liquors, like poisons, might not be sold to persons who had not reached a certain reasonable age. But when they came to a "different" principle, that the public-house was of a certain character;
*MR. SPEAKER: The noble Lord is going into the principle of the Bill.
*EARL PERCY, reverting to the question of penalising of parents, argued against it, and said it was a totally different principle from that for which he voted on the Second Reading.
SIR W. HART-DYKE (Kent, Dartford) said he thought it was a great pity that this Bill should have been introduced by a private Member. He thought a question of this kind, affecting as it did the social and domestic life of a great mass of the people, ought to be dealt with only in Committee of the Whole House, and under the full auspices of the Government of the day. It was not a question to be hurried through the Second Reading in two or three hours. He was in the unhappy position that, owing to his being a member of the Committee of Selection, he would be unable to serve on the Grand Committee. He regarded this as an impossible and impracticable Bill, a clear proof of which had been given by the number of Amendments put on the Paper with a view to altering its framework. If the resolution were agreed to, he was afraid that some day in August, and perhaps after twelve o'clock at night, they would be driven to discuss the Bill on the Report stage, which would be a great mistake. Public opinion was not yet fully alive to the proposals of the Bill. That was a fact, and, as the House knew, their proceedings were always six months ahead of public opinion. It would take at least another six months for the mass of the working classes of the country to understand the meaning of the Bill. A great many of his constituents were anxious to have the Bill passed, and it was very hard that he should be placed in the position of having to give a hostile vote to the measure; but he appealed, on behalf of those who as yet knew nothing about it, to allow the Bill to be dealt with in Committee of the Whole House.
MR. ELLIS GRIFFITH (Anglesea) said that if the right hon. Gentleman's
constituents desired to have this Bill passed, the best way of doing it was for the right hon. Gentleman to vote for the resolution. Unless the resolution were passed the Bill could not possibly become law this session. He thought they could very well postpone the discussion till the Report stage, if any hon. Gentleman wished to oppose it.
*SIR FRANCIS POWELL (Wigan) said he certainly hoped the Bill would be referred to the Grand Committee on Law. He had considerable interest in the action of that Committee, and believed that all the Amendments which had been put down on the Paper were of such a character that they could only be thoroughly discussed by the Standing Committee on Law. This Bill was not nearly so contentious as the Vaccination Bill, which was dealt with by that Committee, and had become a law of the land. It was one which he believed was desired by a large proportion of the working classes of this country, who would regard it as a great misfortune if the House of Commons did not give proper facilities for passing a Bill which a large portion of the community at all events believed would produce sobriety and prosperity in the country.
MR. GRETTON (Derbyshire, S.) said although he was opposed to the principle of the Bill being referred to a Grand Committee, and was of opinion that a Committee of the House of Commons was the only proper tribunal to discuss a measure of this kind, he did not wish to impede its progress. The Bill dealt with the private life and habits of the people, and it was to be regretted that it should be taken away from the House of Commons and discussed upstairs in what could only be regarded as a private capacity. He sincerely hoped that the Grand Committee would be able to safeguard the various interests which the proposals of the Bill attacked.
*SIR HARRY BULLARD (Norwich) did not wish to stop the progress of the Bill, which was well thought of in his constituency; but as a brewer and a Frequenter of public-houses he asked for fair play to be shown to that particular business. They were fully as philanthropic as were the proposer and
seconder of the measure, and they did not wish;nor could any right-minded man wish;to see little "kiddies" toddling along the streets with pots of beer. All they wished was that the promoters of the Bill would meet them in a fair way with respect to the age limit.
*MR. SPEAKER: Order, order! The hon. Member must confine his remarks to the question.
*SIR HARRY BULLARD disclaimed all intention of entering into the merits of the Bill, but he found as a listener to the debates that a great deal more time was occupied in discussing how the business was to be done than was devoted to the business itself. He did not wish to reiterate the merits of the Bill, but seeing that so many were anxious to see it passed into law, why should they not sit on a Saturday and discuss it before a Committee of the Whole House? He would not vote against the motion, because in their particular business they wished to have the matter settled; they desired to be amenable to the law, and to do their duty as average Englishmen.
Question put, and agreed to.
BEER BILL.
Order for Committee read.
*MR. PURVIS (Peterborough) moved "That the Order for Committee be discharged, and that the Bill be committed to the Standing Committee on Law." The opponents of the Bill had declared that it was of so highly technical a character that it could not be adequately discussed by a Standing Committee on Law, but that it must go to a Select Committee. He should confine himself to the mere question;whether it was simple enough to be dealt with by the Grand Committee on Law, or too technical. The opponents to the Bill contended that until the Report of the Royal Commission on Arsenic in Food and Drink had been published, this Bill was premature. That argument was based on the assumption that the Bill sought to elbow out the Royal Commission on Arsenic, but it did nothing of the kind. There was a great outcry about the brewing and agricultural interests, and about their being heard;
but they had been sufficiently heard, and there was a whole literature already published on this matter. They were heard before the Beer Committee of 1899, and by the Manchester committee appointed by the brewers themselves, and the matter is now also being investigated by a Royal Commission. There is already a whole literature of evidence on the subject, to master which one must "Scorn delights and live laborious days" poring over Blue-books and other documents. But great as is this stir about interests, I have heard or read hardly a word about another and greater interest;that of the consumer. I must be careful not to go into details, but it is said that the Bill will upset arrangements in the brewing trade and in the manufacture of malt substitutes; that it will upset arrangements which have existed for twenty years. It will do no such thing. Brewers will still be able to brew as they like and what they like, so far as this Bill is concerned. The motion to refer the Bill to a Select Committee is intended to kill the Bill. It is a motion which reveals the real nature of the opposition. Our opponents do not rest upon the inherent strength of their own case or upon any inherent weakness in ours; they simply attempt to hang up the Bill and to stop its further progress under a colourable stratagem, wearing the mask of a desire for more light on a matter which requires no further light so far as this Bill is concerned. I do not complain of their using all the means in their power to achieve their end; I only hope they will not succeed by concealing their real object under the cloak of a motion;to refer the Bill to a Select Committee. In vain is the net set in the sight of any bird, and I trust the House will not be caught with its eyes open. I beg to move.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the Order for Committee be discharged, and that the Bill be committed to the Standing Committee on Law, etc.";(Mr. Purvis.)
MR. STUART WORTLEY (Sheffield, Hallam): I rise to express the hope that the House will not agree to this proposal. I do so solely in the interests of the Standing
Committee procedure of this House. Although it is difficult to formulate in the Standing Orders the distinction between Bills which ought to go to Standing Committees and Bills which should be considered by Committee of the Whole House, from the point of view of common sense, and of experience of the working of the Grand Committees, the thing is not by any means so difficult. What you cannot say in a Standing Order, but what you can in your own mind define as a distinction, is that the House should not send to be discussed by Standing Committees Bills which are in their nature deeply controversial, and which, as such, are opposed on Second Reading on matters of principle. On the other hand, for sending to Standing Committees you must find Bills which are sufficiently amusing in their nature to attract Members to the Committees. Unfortunately, the Bill before the House is condemned by the first of those considerations. I came down to the House prepared to vote, if necessary, for the reference of the Bill we have just disposed of to a Standing Committee, on the ground that I had reason to hope, notwithstanding the pessimistic prognostications of my noble friend the Member for South Kensington, that the Bill had reached an uncontroversial stage of its existence. But that cannot be said of the Bill under discussion. I warn the House that if they send this Bill at this stage of the session to a Standing Committee they will be going far to discredit the procedure of those Committees, and to make less their opportunity of doing such good work as they did in the early days of their existence.
MR. STEVENSON (Suffolk, Eye): I hope the House will adopt the same course of action in this instance as was adopted with regard to the Children's Bill. Measures of a far more contentious and controversial character than the Bill before the House have been discussed by the Standing Committee. The Diseases of Animals Bill and the Vaccination Bill are probably within the memory of many Members of the House. I am certain that no harm would be done by referring this Bill to the Standing Committee on Law. Not only would the existing members of that Committee be fully
capable of dealing with the subject, but other members would be added who are specially qualified, by their interest or occupation, to deal with the more technical aspects of the question. There have been many inquiries into the matter; the Second Reading of the Bill was carried by a large majority; and there will be a further opportunity of discussion on the Report stage. I hope, therefore, the motion of the hon. Member for Peterborough will be adopted.
MR. FLOWER (Bradford, W.); I cordially agree that this Bill is one of quite a different class and character from the one previously disposed of, and I hope the House will not be influenced by the fact that the fate of the two Bills was set down for decision on the same day, or that they seem in some way to be connected in the public mind. I should certainly have supported the sending of the previous Bill to the Standing Committee, but I suggest that there are many good and valid reasons why that course is inadvisable with regard to this measure. The hon. Member for Peterborough referred with paternal fondness to the simplicity of the Bill, saying, rather unwisely, that he who runs may read. I invite any hon. Member to take up a copy of the Bill, to read it through, and then to say whether or not it is a Bill of a simple character. It is a measure of a highly complex and technical character, and one which, in my humble judgment, can be wisely and carefully considered only by a Committee which has an opportunity of hearing evidence and of examining the statements made on the subject. The interests involved make the subject a complicated one. There is the great agricultural interest. The argument was certainly used by the promoters of the Bill that it was a measure which would lead to an increased demand for English barley. That statement was contradicted. It may or may not be true, but surely, in order to ascertain whether or nor it is true, there can be no better machinery than that of calling witnesses and examining their evidence on the matter. Then there is the interest of the Revenue. On that point I confess I should like to have had some guidance from the Chancellor of the Exchequer. It is quite true that in
common with his predecessor the right hon Gentleman spoke and voted against the Bill. But he seemed to be in some doubt as to how far the Revenue would be affected by the Bill. At the opening of his speech he seemed to say that it would be not at all; later on he appeared to be more doubtful; and finally he said he felt himself bound to vote against the Bill. I think it is most essential that there should be a full opportunity for hearing the evidence of the officials of the Inland Revenue, not only as to the effect of the Bill on the Revenue, but also as to the manner in which its provisions are to be enforced. There are also the interests of those who manufacture beer, and of those who sell it. I do not desire to suggest that their interests should weigh in the consideration of a measure of a public character such as this, but surely they have a right to place their views before a Committee which is considering a Bill which certainly deals with their industry in a very drastic fashion. The course I would ask the House to adopt is of sending the Bill to a Select Committee. In doing so, I venture to say that I am acting strictly in accordance with precedent. Bills of a complex and technical character have repeatedly been referred by the House to Select Committees. There have been the Bills dealing with undersized fish, the Agricultural Produce Bill, the Companies Bill, the Adulteration Bill, and many others. I should like to mention one other, namely, the Cottage Homes Bill. At the time that was referred to the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Sleaford was President of the Local Government Board, and it fell to his lot to represent the Government. He made a very interesting speech on the subject, and wound up by saying that the Bill ought to go to a Select Committee. That is exactly my opinion with regard to this Bill, and it would be interesting to learn why the right hon. Gentleman insisted upon that course with regard to a comparatively simple measure like the Cottage Homes Bill, and yet objects to it being followed when dealing with the intensely complicated and intricate matter with which we are now concerned. The history of this Bill is rather a curious one. I suppose it derives such force as it has in public opinion from the deplorable outbreak of poisoning which
took place last year. But the hon. Member for Peterborough has frankly admitted that so far as the arsenic question is concerned, the Bill does not touch it at all, and the measure, I believe, would not have obtained the considerable majority it did on the Second Reading had it not been for the impression in the House and throughout the country that the Bill was intended to secure the purity and wholesomeness of beer.
*MR. SPEAKER: Order, order! The hon. Member is not now speaking to the motion before the House.
MR. FLOWER: I recognise that I was going somewhat into the merits of the Bill, but I was anxious that the House should realise that the Bill is of a totally different class from the one recently referred to a Standing Committee. This is a Bill which touches several interests, and it ought to be sent to a Select Committee, which could hear the evidence of the parties interested, and investigate the statements made for and against the measure. I beg to move the motion standing in my name.
Amendment proposed;
"To leave out the words 'the Standing Committee on Law, etc.,' and insert the words 'a Select Committee.'";(Mr. Flower.)
Question proposed, "That the words 'the Standing Committee on Law, etc.' stand part of the Question."
LORD EDMOND FITZMAURICE (Wiltshire, Cricklade): As I happen at this moment to be Chairman of the Standing Committee on Law, perhaps the House will permit me to say a few words on this matter. Arguments have been put forward with regard to the proper functions of Standing Committees, the class of Bills that ought to be referred to them, and the intentions of Mr. Gladstone when the Committees were originally set up. I do not intend to go over the arguments which have been used, but I wish to put before the House one fact which has not yet been mentioned, but which I think is worthy of consideration. I would put it in the shape of an appeal to my right hon. friend representing the Home Department, what are the intentions of the
Government with regard to this Bill? Upon the answer to that question ought to depend very largely;I do not say exclusively;whether or not the House should send the Bill to the Standing Committee on Law. The session is going on. Next Tuesday is July 2nd, and on that day the Standing Committee will have the Youthful Offenders Bill before it. I think we may be able to dispose of that in, at most, two sittings;I hope in one. After that, the Committee will have the Children's Bill to consider. That Bill will lead to considerably more discussion than the Youthful Offenders Bill, and, so far as you can make a forecast, I am inclined to think that those two Bills will occupy the four days which the Standing Committee has at its disposal in the next two weeks. That, no doubt, will leave time, perhaps ample time, for the discussion of even the controversial issues raised by the Bill before the House. But, assuming that the deliberations will last a considerable time, and bearing in mind that the Committee has only two days per week at its disposal, it is quite clear that it will be late in the session when the Bill comes back to the House. In all probability, the Government will then be absolute masters of the time of the House, and no private Member's measure will have the slightest chance of passing unless the Government submit it to the friendly ordeal known as "starring." If the Government do not intend to take this Bill under their protection by "starring" it, the measure will in all probability be lost. That raises a very large question. If Bills are sent to the Standing Committees at a period of the session when the members think their labours will be thrown away, it will become increasingly difficult to secure an adequate attendance or even a quorum at the Committees. It is frequently difficult, owing to the naturally dry and technical character of most of the measures which go to these Committees, especially to the Committee on Law, to secure a quorum; but if, in addition to that, a Bill comes at this period of the session, although it may perhaps be of a somewhat more exciting character than usual, I am afraid it will be difficult to induce members to attend if they think;
*MR. SPEAKER: I think the noble Lord will not be in order in discussing the general constitution of the Standing Committees, or the difficulty or otherwise of inducing members to attend.
LORD EDMOND FITZMAURICE: I do not wish to discuss the general question; I only wish to point out that it will be difficult to secure the attendance of members if they think the Government do not intend to give facilities to the Bill when it comes back to the House. That being so, I would ask the right hon. Gentleman if he is in a position to state the intentions of the Government, because if they do not intend to "star" the Bill, in all probability the appointment of a Select Committee would be the best course to adopt this year, and then next year possibly the Bill might pass in its usual course.
MR. LAMBERT (Devonshire, South Molton): I desire to associate myself with the hon. Member for Peterborough. The difference between the two motions, to my mind, is that with one the idea is to kill the Bill, while the other is moved with the desire to secure the passage of the measure into law. I regard the Amendment as a politically dishonest method of killing the Bill. The opponents of the measure have been defeated in the division lobby; they will not come out into the open; and they want to refer the Bill to a Select Committee in order that it may be smothered by evidence and have no chance whatever of passing this session. The stale suggestion has been made that a Bill of this character should not be referred to a Standing Committee. I cannot conceive a Bill which could more properly be so referred. The Bill was carried by an enormous majority on its Second Reading, and yet the hon. Member opposite says it has not been sufficiently discussed, and that we want more evidence. There has already been one Select Committee, which had the effect of killing the Bill for that session. It is because I want the Bill to pass that I shall strenuously oppose the motion of the hon. Member for West Bradford. The motion to refer the measure to the Standing Committee has not earlier been discussed, because, for three months,
it has been deliberately blocked. During those three months the Standing Committee on Law has had practically nothing to do, and this Bill might have been disposed of but for the action of some hon. Members opposite.
DR. FARQUHARSON (Aberdeenshire, W.): I cannot conceive a better or more effective method of killing the Bill than that of sending it to a Grand Committee. I entirely associate myself with the remarks of the noble Lord, who has pointed out, with great truth, that the Standing Committee on Law is now congested with work. As a member of the Committee of Selection I know perfectly well that at this time of the session it will be very difficult to get members to attend, especially during the hot weather. If the Bill is sent to a Select Committee the Committee could be appointed almost immediately and commence its sittings. There are a great many important questions connected with the subject, and a Select Committee could take scientific evidence, especially in regard to Clause 2, as to substitutes for malt in brewing. I am, therefore, emphatically in favour of sending the Bill to a Select Committee.
MR. CHAPLIN (Lincolnshire, Sleaford): My hon. friend opposite has very properly described this Amendment. It is undoubtedly a pretext for killing the Bill. But, if the Amendment is bad in itself, the reasons urged in its support are a great deal worse. The hon. Member for West Bradford has told us that the supporters of the Bill desire to refer it to a Committee, before which the various interests involved cannot possibly get a fair hearing, and, also, that it is absolutely necessary that we should have more evidence. How much more evidence is required? On the last occasion, when a similar Bill was before the House a Committee was appointed. That Committee sat for three years, and a mass of evidence was taken. Within six months after that Committee had reported that everything was safe and nothing needed to be done the recent epidemic broke out. There was a Commission appointed at Manchester by the brewers themselves, and that Commission has just reported. There is a Royal Commission sitting at this
moment. That Commission has taken a great deal of evidence which has been reported from day to day in the public press and is accessible to all. There is, therefore, an enormous body of evidence before the House of Commons and the country; and under the circumstances it is absurd to propose that the question should now be referred to a fourth Committee, because, forsooth, the public have had no opportunity of gaining information upon the question. If hon. Gentlemen wish to defeat the Bill, let them say so openly. I frankly admit that they cannot adopt better means than that of sending it to a Select Committee. Everybody knows that even the appointment of such a Committee, unless further time was afforded by the Government, is impossible, as the opponents of the Bill certainly would not allow us to take it after twelve o'clock. Everybody must understand that the object of the Amendment is to kill the Bill, and I earnestly hope that the House, which carried the Second Reading by so large a majority, will at least grant us this;that the proposals contained in this Bill should go before the Standing Committee, where they can be thoroughly threshed out. And here is the answer to the question put by the noble Lord opposite. The decision of the First Lord of the Treasury has already been stated on this subject, namely, that if the Bill comes back to the House not more controversial than it goes to the Committee, or, at all events, reasonably uncontroversial, as we hope, with Amendments, it may do, it will naturally go forward through its further stages. I, therefore, hope the Amendment of my hon. friend will be rejected.
MR. JORDAN (Fermanagh, S.): I confess that, as a teetotaler, I hardly know which way to vote. I know that if the Bill is sent to a Select Committee it will probably be killed for this session, and poisonous beer will not be interfered with. That being so, I am not certain whether that would not be a good way of diminishing the sale of beer. On the other hand, if the Bill goes to the Standing, Committee, it is likely to pass, and then you may get pure beer, and my fear is that if you get pure beer the sale and
the drinking of beer will be increased. I am, therefore, in a strait between the two. Seeing, however, that the House was so generous in relation to the Children's Bill, I feel inclined to treat this Bill in the same way, and, therefore, having balanced the two proposals, I shall vote for sending the Bill to the Standing Committee.
*MR. GROVES (Salford, S.): I hope I shall be able to settle the indecision of the hon. Member who has just spoken by telling him that so far as those who are responsible for the measure before the House are concerned he need not trouble his mind at all. The original Bill does not provide, or profess to provide, in any shape or form for the purity of beer. It is not a Pure Beer Bill, but I admit that on the Second Reading there was some doubt raised on the point, and that a large number of Members who supported the Second Reading were under the impression that they were doing something which would ensure the purity of beer. I consider that it is certainly better to send the Bill to a Committee specially selected, who would devote their time and attention to the discussion of the subject, rather than to a Committee composed of a large number of Members who are lax in their attendance, are wanting in expert knowledge of the question, and who will not give the attention to the subject which its importance warrants, because then when the Bill came down to the House again on the Report stage we should be no further advanced than we are now. The hon. Member for South Molton taunted the minority on this question with having been beaten in the open by an enormous majority, and with now attempting to minimise the importance of the division by a side issue, but for the reasons I have given, and which I think answer the hon. Member, there cannot be the slightest doubt as to which is the better qualified body to deal with a matter of this technical and controversial character. I shall, therefore, support the motion to refer the Bill to a Select Committee.
*MR. HEMPHILL (Tyrone, N.): I am glad to see the First Lord of the Treasury in his place, because it is extremely
desirable that we should have some light and leading as to the actual designs of the Government in this matter. As a member of the Standing Committee on Law, I entirely agree with the remarks of the noble Lord beside us. If this Bill is sent to the Committee, it should be on the distinct understanding that when it comes back to the House the Government will take charge of its further stages in order that it may pass this session. I confess I do not think there is any particular privity between law and beer; certainly so far as we Irish lawyers are concerned, I think we are about as incompetent a tribunal as possible to form a judgment on the merits of pure beer, so that, prima facie, I should be inclined to say that the Bill should be considered either by the Whole House or by a Select Committee. It would be extremely difficult for Members like myself, who are anxious always to give an intelligent vote, to deal with a subject of this more or less technical character. If, however, the Government undertake to adopt the Bill when it comes back, I will vote for its reference to the Standing Committee.
MR. BANBURY (Camberwell, Peckham): I think this Bill should go to a Select Committee, because it introduces a novel principle into our legislation, in that it gives power to justices to compel persons to sell a certain article. Under these circumstances it would be only fair to the people who sell the article that they should have an opportunity of producing evidence and stating their case before a Select Committee, because if the Bill goes to the Standing Committee some injustice may be done.
MR. HEYWOOD JOHNSTONE (Sussex, Horsham): Having occasionally served on the Standing Committees, I frankly own that a less satisfactory tribunal for dealing with a measure of this sort could hardly be conceived. The attendance is scant and infrequent; it is difficult to know when any particular Amendment is coming on; and the moment a division is called the door is locked, so that everyone outside is prevented from recording his opinion. Those who are serving on private Bill Committees, or who are called out of the
room on any other business for the moment, know how exceedingly inconvenient that is. Furthermore, I do not think that the same amount of discussion and consideration is given to matters in the Standing Committees as is done either in Committee of the Whole House or before a Select Committee. This Bill raises a considerable number of controversial points, not of principle, but of detail. It is true the Second Reading was carried by a large majority, but the only principle the House then affirmed was in favour of the purity of beer. But the Bill raises other questions of quite as great importance. It has been suggested that it would promote the growth of English barley. That is a point the Committee ought to consider very carefully indeed, as we have no evidence, and the Standing Committee could have no evidence to justify the supporting of the Bill on that ground. The question whether malt beer has the sole right to be considered pure and wholesome beer, or whether beer brewed from malt substitutes may not be considered equally pure and wholesome, is another matter of considerable importance, which can be decided properly only by a Select Committee having power to take evidence. A third point would be the effect of the measure upon the trade itself. I am not interested in the trade to any extent, but I do say that the Bill would very largely affect both the producer and the retailer. Under this Bill the retailer will have to duplicate all his vessels for the sale of beer. I think these are points of principle and not of detail, and I hope that they will be carefully considered, whatever Committee the Bill is referred to. For these reasons I cannot help feeling that it would be far better that this question should be dealt with by a Select Committee or by a Committee of this House. I trust this Bill, therefore, will be referred to a Select Committee which can take evidence.
MR. WALLACE (Perth): I intend to oppose this Bill when it comes back to the House, but in order that it may be discussed I shall vote for it going to the Grand Committee. I think before we proceed any further with this Bill we ought to have some opinion upon it from some representative of His Majesty's Government.
MR. GALLOWAY (Manchester, S.W.): I object, in the first place, strongly to the Bill being referred to the Grand Committee. Those who have read the discussion which took place when Grand Committees were set up, and those who were in the House at the time, will remember that in the autumn session at the end of November Mr Gladstone was only able to carry his motion by giving an undertaking that only non-contentious measures should be sent to Grand Committees. My hon. friend the Member for Peckham has pointed out that an entirely new principle is contained in this Bill. With that contention I entirely agree, but I do not understand his argument, and I cannot see how he justified his contention that the Bill ought to be referred to a Select Committee. I should have thought that the hon. Member would have contended that the Bill ought to be discussed by the whole House, and not by some other tribunal.
MR. BANBURY: That is why I wish it to be sent to a Select Committee.
MR. GALLOWAY: In some cases I have known such a reason as this induce him to oppose such a course being taken. I do not think that even a Select Committee is specially qualified to deal with such a subject. A Select Committee ought to be a tribunal for inquiring into the subject-matter rather than into the merits of the Bill. I am entirely opposed to a Select Committee. I want to ask the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Bordesley a question. The motion before the House is to refer the Bill to the Standing Committee on Law, and I am opposed to that. The hon. Member for Bradford has moved an Amendment to refer the Bill to a Select Committee, and I am opposed to that course. What I desire to ask the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Bordesley is that he shall make some statement which will be a guide to myself as to which way I shall vote when the question is put from the Chair, and I hope before the question goes to a division the right hon. Gentleman will give me and other hon. Members who find themselves in a similar difficulty some guidance in this matter.
MR. MOULTON (Cornwall, Launceston): I am afraid that in this matter
I take a somewhat more serious view than most of the speakers who have addressed the House upon the point as to whether this Bill ought to go to a Select Committee or to the Grand Committee on Law. I take it that we must consider what the opposition to this Bill rests upon, so as to see whether it is a mere question of drafting or a much deeper question requiring a knowledge of the facts. I have said that I take a most serious view of this Bill. This is not because it applies to the brewing industry. The brewing industry is a great industry, and though I wish it were not so great, I feel that it must receive fair treatment at our hands. Now this Bill is in my view as had a Bill as can be brought before Parliament from the point of view not only of this special industry, but also of industrial progress generally. This class of Bill will become more and more frequent as we advance in knowledge. I have spent my life almost in watching the people who develop the various industries of our land, and I have seen things beginning with a mere rule-of-thumb practice develop into a science. And the more that occurs, what follows? It follows that those people who know the science and work it to its best advantage, those people who give us the greatest power over nature and enable us to use that power with the greatest economy and success get further and further away from the knowledge of the common people. What they do is not understood, and if anybody, whether from some political ambition or from greed or prejudice, commences an attack upon those who are in the forefront of any practical science, he can always get an audience ignorant enough;I do not use the word in any offensive sense;of what is being done in the development of that science to support him. Now I am asked whether I will let this Bill go to a Committee, where it will be debated as a political matter without an opportunity being afforded of arriving at the real facts of the case, or whether I want it to go to a Committee who can look, examine, and ascertain the facts of the case and see what is just to the various interests affected by this Bill. Now when that is the issue
before us, I say that it is a Bill which ought to be dealt with with knowledge. I am sure Mr. Speaker will not consider that I am trespassing upon another stage of the Bill if I point out two or three things which will have to be raised in the Committee stage of this Bill, for I want to show that to legislate blindly and without knowledge in this case is to legislate badly, and that the only way in which each one of us can fit himself for legislation upon this matter is by seriously studying the subject and mastering the facts. Let me take the question of the agricultural interest as an example. How has this measure obtained support from the agricultural interest? People have said, "We grow barley, which makes malt; let us make the brewers use malt, and malt only, in the manufacture of beer. This will increase the demand for our malt." They do not know that the salvation of the English malt-grower and the English barley-grower lies in the skill with which modern brewing science can take the defective English malts and make them do duty in producing high-class beer. The quantity of sugars and other materials used to render this English malt equal to its duty is trivial, and if you stop the use of these materials, if you throw the ban of public opinion upon them, it means that you give up to an enormous extent using these English malts at all. To the persons who merely treat this question as a political matter all malt is malt, and that which assists in the use of malt assists the barley-grower. That is what ignorance does, and that is how ignorance makes you look at this Bill. But when you begin to put yourself in possession of the actual knowledge of brewing science you see that the additional power which has been given to the brewing chemists by the knowledge of the properties of brewing sugars enables them to use the imperfect material which is so largely grown in England. The true rival of English malt is not these sugars. These sugars are its best friends. The real rival is the foreign malt. Are you going to send a question of this kind to a Committee on Law to be swayed by people who spend their time in studying law? Are you going to send to a Committee on Law
a Bill which may have the effect;and which will have the effect if it is passed and succeeds in its object;of reducing the percentage of English malt used from 80 to about 50 per cent. Is that the sort of Committee to deal with such a question? I do beseech this House to look upon this Bill in the serious light in which I have put it before the House, namely, that it is attacking people;and chiefly English people;who have worked out during the last twenty or thirty years a complete science, of the very rudiments of which I do not suppose ten people in this House, with the exception of brewers, are acquainted. Are you going to take a Bill which will have important practical consequences of that kind and send it to people for consideration who will discuss it as a matter of drafting. This would be all very well if they were drawing up a Bill upon some matter which they had been studying all their lives, but this is a matter in which the one mischievous thing is ignorance. It is only ignorance that is here to be feared. I believe that you might take at random from all sides of the House and from all parties twenty men and put them down to legislate on this matter, and if they had full knowledge the result would be exactly the same whichever twenty men you took. That which is dangerous in such legislation is legislating without that technical knowledge which enables people to understand the meaning and the purport of the very thing to which the Bill is addressed. Let me give an example of the way in which ignorance or want of accurate knowledge upon these points must affect the tribunal dealing with this matter. We have heard some speeches both on this side of the House and on the other side dealing with arsenic in beer, as if this Bill had something to do with the poisoning which occurred in the recent arsenic epidemic. And this the common belief. Yet there is not a man who has gone thoroughly into this matter who does not know that this question of arsenic in beer has not got the remotest connection with this Bill. The real difficulty which is felt by everybody who has seriously taken up the question of arsenic in beer is the keeping of arsenic out of malt. The
malt is the real problem for those who are dealing with this question. There is no difficulty in keeping it out of the sugars and other substances used, and yet it is against these only that the Bill is directed. I do not intend to delay the House any further, and all I will ask is that hon. Members shall put to themselves this question;Is this a Bill upon which a right knowledge is necessary, or is it a case in which you may act without knowledge and pass a measure which is going to throw a stigma on the methods of the preparation of beer without the means of arriving at the knowledge of their nature and consequences. Remember that these methods which are being attacked are really a credit to this country? This Bill will throw into the background the triumphs of science which have given us a better, a purer, and a lighter beer, and a beer which has been so good that it has driven out that invasion of foreign beer with which we were threatened at one time. The excellence of the brewing science has enabled you to resist the invasion of lager beer. In a question of that kind, in which the right and the wrong rest upon the right appreciation of technical questions, will you be doing justice to the people and the trade of England if you send the Bill to a Committee which from its very nature cannot ask for information, and must simply trust to that knowledge, or want of knowledge, which Members of the Committee might possess?
MR. DALY (Monaghan, S.): It strikes me that there was scarcely any necessity for the hon. and learned Member for Launceston to state that there were not ten members in the House who understood this question. [An HON. MEMBER: It is quite true.] The hon. Member opposite says it is quite true. I do not know whether he is a brewer or a barley grower, but I do feel that in this House the brewing interest is largely represented. As far as I am concerned, I do not always agree with my hon. friend the Member for South Fermanagh upon this question; but on this occasion I am prepared to support the sending of this Bill to a Committee upstairs, where I
think it will be fairly treated. I think the Members of the Grand Committee on Law will be quite capable of dealing with this question in a proper manner, and I hope upon that Committee we shall have the assistance of the hon. and learned Member for Launceston. Perhaps if the hon. Member is placed upon that Committee he may be able to dispel some of the ignorance which he alleges exists among the Members of that Committee. I am not like the hon. Member for South-west Manchester upon this question, for I have no difficulty in making up my mind which way to vote. I intend to support this motion, and I do not think there need be any hesitation in sending this Bill to a Committee upstairs. It is an unfortunate thing that so many people have been poisoned by the drinking of impure beer. We are not troubled in Ireland with anything in the way of poisoned beer, because it is well known that in Ireland the beer is the best in the world.
COLONEL KENYON-SLANEY (Shropshire, Newport): I take exception altogether to the speech of the hon. and learned Gentleman the Member for Launceston, who seems to suppose that all knowledge is confined to lawyers. The principal line of argument taken up by the hon. and learned Member for Launceston is that in sending this Bill to the Grand Committee we are running counter to the development of scientific brewing. Are we to accept gratefully the scientific knowledge which has resulted in the deaths of hundreds of people by poisoning in Manchester? (Cries of "Oh, oh!"] I do not wonder that hon. Members do not think that argument is a sound one;it is only the sufferers from the poisoning who think it is sound This development of scientific brewing at any rate has not been advantageous to the general welfare of the public. The hon. and learned Member for Launceston has been allowed to embark upon on or two subjects which I should have thought were controversial matters.
*MR. SPEAKER; I must point out that the reason why the observations of the hon. and learned Member for the Launceston Division were in order was
that he was pointing out that this Bill was one which involved a great number of scientific questions which could not be satisfactorily settled by the Committee, which had not the opportunity of hearing expert evidence. The hon. and gallant Member will not be in order in dealing with the merits of the Bill.
COLONEL KENYON-SLANEY: Shall I be in order, Mr. Speaker, in taking up the argument of the hon. and learned Member upon the question as to how the agricultural interest will be affected by this Bill?
*MR. SPEAKER: Not in the economic sense, but in the scientific sense, yes.
COLONEL KENYON-SLANEY: I confess that it is a little difficult for ignorant and uneducated agriculturists to separate the economic from the scientific. I did hear the hon. and learned Member for Launceston make some remarks, upon which I am prepared to upset him, but whether they are economic or scientific I am not quite certain. I know that he made one or two statements which are contrary to the facts. He gave as one of his reasons for opposing this motion that we must take evidence as to whether foreign barley would supplant English barley. May I point out to the hon. and learned Member that the primary intention of the promoters of this Bill is not one which enters into the question of barley at all. The primary intention of the promoters of this Bill is that the consumer shall have the right to ask for a certain article, and that he shall not be supplied with something entirely different.
*MR. SPEAKER: I think that is an economic question and not a scientific one.
COLONEL KENYON-SLANEY: I find that this is extremely cramped and difficult country to ride over. At least, I may say that the hon. and learned Gentleman, when he pointed out what the results would be of substituting foreign barley for English, forgot to mention that, in many instances, already the brewers used from 60 to 70 per cent. of sugar. [Cries of "No, no."] From
those cries the House will notice the difference between ignorance and knowledge. There is a possible contingency that those hon. Members who differ from me may be ignorant, and I may be right. There is also this to be recollected. If this Bill has to have the scientific and economic effect which the hon. and learned Member desires, it will be possible to drive out this sugar and introduce more barley. But we are not discussing the question of any antagonism between English and foreign barley, and our object will be achieved if the result of this Bill is that beer will be brewed from barley, whether English or foreign, rather than from other substances which
AYES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E,)
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Aird, Sir John
Evans, Sir Francis H (Maidstone
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Leveson-Gower, Frederick N. S.
Allen, Charles P. (Glouc., Stroud
Fenwick, Charles
Lewis, John Herbert
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Ffrench, Peter
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Atherley-Jones, L.
Field, William
Lundon, W.
Bailey, James (Walworth)
Finch, George H.
Macdona, John Cumming
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Flynn, James Christopher
Mac Donnell, Dr. Mark A.
Baldwin, Alfred
Forster, Henry William
M'Crae, George
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Gilhooly, James
M'Govern, T.
Balfour, Maj K. R(Christchurch
Goddard, Daniel Ford
M'Iver, Sir Lewis (Edinburgh W
Barry, E. (Cork, S)
Godson, Sir Augustus Frederick
M'Kenna, Reginald
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Gore, Hon. G R C Ormsby- (Salop
M'Killop, James(Stirlingshire)
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Gore, Hon. S. F. Ormsby- (Lincs.
Milton, Viscount
Bignold, Arthur
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Boland, John
Grant, Corrie
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Guest, Hon. Ivor Churchill
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Brand, Hon. Arthur G.
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Murphy, John
Broadhurst, Henry
Hain, Edward
Newnes, Sir George
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Hammond, John
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.)
Brown, Alexander H. (Shropsh.)
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Burns, John
Hardie, J. Keir (Merthyr Tydvil)
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Burt, Thomas
Harmsworth, R. Leicester
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Mid
Cameron, Robert
Haslett, Sir James Horner
O'Brien, Patrick) Kilkenny)
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J. A. (Glasgow
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur D.
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Carew, James Laurence
Helme, Norval Watson
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.)
Carlile, William Walter
Hermon-Hodge, Robert Trotter
O'Doherty, William
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbyshire
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
Channing, Francis Allston
Horniman, Frederick John
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
Cogan, Denis J.
Hoult, Joseph
O'Mara, James
Cohen, Benjamin Louis
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Colville, John
Hudson, George Bickersteth
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Craig, Robert Hunter
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C
Palmer, Sir Charles M. (Durham
Crombie, John William
Jacoby, James Alfred
Parkes, Ebenezer
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Paulton, James Mellor
Crossley, Sir Savile
Johnston, William (Belfast)
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Daly, James
Jones, David Brynmor (Swans'a
Pease, Sir Joseph W. (Durham)
Davies, M. Vaughan- (Cardigan)
Jordan, Jeremiah
Percy, Earl
Delany, William
Joyce, Michael
Philipps, John Wynford
Dillon, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
Pilkington, Lieut- Col. Richard
Donelan, Captain A.
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop.)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Doogan, P.C.
Kinloch, Sir John George Smyth
Pretyman, Ernest George
Doughty, George
Lambert, George
Rankin, Sir James
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Rea, Russell
Duffy, William J.
Lawson, John Grant
Reddy, M.
Duncan, J. Hastings
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Edwards, Frank
Leese, Sir Joseph F. (Accrington)
Renshaw, Charles Bine
in many cases have proved deleterious. This is not a highly controversial, complex, or technical Bill, and it is capable of being dealt with on its merits by any rational Committee upstairs. The Grand Committee on Law is perfectly competent to arrive at a reasonable and fair solution of the difficulties, and although it may be possible for those who oppose the Bill to introduce all manner of technicalities, that charge cannot justly be brought against the promoters of the Bill.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 190; Noes, 175. (Division List No. 279.)
Rentoul, James Alexander
Soares, Ernest J.
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan)
Rigg, Richard
Spear, John Ward
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Stevenson, Francis S.
Welby, Sir Chas. G. E. (Notts.
Roe, Sir Thomas
Stewart, Sir M. J. M'Taggart
White, George (Norfolk)
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Stirling-Maxwell, Sir John M.
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Strachey, Edward
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel Walter
Sullivan, Donal
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Round, James
Talbot, Rt. Hn. J. C. (Oxf'd Univ.
Willoughby, de Eresby, Lord
Russell, T. W.
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Wilson, F. W. (Norfolk, Mid)
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Schwann, Charles E.
Thompson, Dr E C (Monagh'n, N
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Scott, Chas. Prestwich (Leigh)
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray
Yoxall, James Henry
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Wallace, Robert
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr.
Smith, H. C (North'mb Tyneside
Walrond, Rt. Hn. Sir William H.
Purvis and Sir Cuthbert
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand)
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Quilter.
Soames, Arthur Wellesley
Warr, Augustus Frederick
NOES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Mooney, John J.
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Flower, Ernest
Morgan, David J (Walthamstow
Allsopp, Hon. George
Fuller, J. M. F.
Morrell, George Herbert
Anstruther, H. T.
Galloway, William Johnson
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Gladstone, Rt. Hn. Herbert J.
Moulton, John Fletcher
Austin, Sir John
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Balcarres, Lord
Green, Walford D. (Wednesbury
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Banbury, Frederick George
Greene, Sir E. W (B'ryS Edm'nds
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Nicholson, William Graham
Bill, Charles
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Grey, Sir Edward (Berwick)
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Bond, Edward
Groves, James Grimble
O'Dowd, John
Bowles, T. Gibson (King's Lynn)
Gunter, Sir Robert
O'Kelly, Jas. (Roscommon, N.
Boyle, James
Guthrie, Walter Murray
O'Malley, William
Brigg, John
Haldane, Richard Burdon
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Brunner, Sir John Tomlinson
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Parker, Gilbert
Bryce, Rt. Hon. James
Hayden, John Patrick
Partington, Oswald
Bull, William James
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Pease, Herbert P. (Darlington)
Bullard, Sir Harry
Helder, Augustus
Pierpoint, Robert
Buxton, Sydney Charles
Hemphill, Rt. Hon. Charles H.
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Caldwell, James
Hickman, Sir Alfred
Plummer, Walter R.
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Hoare, Edw Brodie (Hampstead
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich)
Pym, C. Guy
Causton, Richard Knight
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Reckitt, Harold James
Cawley, Frederick
Holland, William Henry
Redmond, William (Clare)
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Reid, James (Greenock)
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Rickett, J. Compton
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Worc'r
Jones, William (Carnarvonshire
Ridley, Hon. M. W. (Stalybridge)
Chapman, Edward
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir John H.
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green)
Coddington, Sir William
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Robinson, Brooke
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Kitson, Sir James
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Knowles, Lees
Rutherford, John
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Law, Andrew Bonar
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Crean, Eugene
Leng, Sir John
Sandys, Lt.-Col. Thos. Myles
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Sassoon, Sir Edw. Albert
Cullinan, J.
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter(Bristol, S)
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Lowe, Francis William
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.)
Denny, Colonel
Loyd, Archie Kirkman
Stock, James Henry
Dickson, Charles Scott
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Douglas, Charles M. (Lanark)
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Dunn, Sir William
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Thomas, Abel (Carmarthen, E.)
Elibank, Master of
M'Calmont, Col. J. (Antrim, E.)
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings)
Fardell, James Patrick
M'Fadden, Edward
Thomas, J A (Glamorg'n, Gower
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
M'Laren, Charles Benjamin
Thornton, Percy M.
Farrell, Sir T. George
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Tollemache, Henry James
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Mather, William
Tomkinson, James
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Maxwell, W. J H (Dumfriesshire
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
Fisher, William Hayes
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Tufnell, Lieut. Col. Edward
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Valentia, Viscount
Vincent, Col. Sir C. E H (Sheffield
Whittaker, Thomas Palmer
Wolff, Gustav Wilhelm
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.)
Williams, Rt. Hn J Powell- (Birm.
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Yerburgh, Robert Armstrong
Webb, Colonel William George
Wills, Sir Frederick
Young, Samuel (Cavan, East)
Welby, Lt.-Col. A. C E. (Taunton
Wilson, A. Stanley (York, E. R.)
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
White, Patrick (Meath, North)
Wilson, John (Durham, Mid)
Mr. Gretton and Mr.
Whiteley, H. (Ashton und. Lyne
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Charles Shaw.
Main Question put, and agreed to.
Order for Committee discharged.
Bill committed to the Standing Committee on Law, etc.
WAYS AND MEANS [25TH JUNE].;REPORT.
Resolution reported;
"That towards making good the Supply granted to His Majesty for the
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J. (Birm.
Flower, Ernest
Aird, Sir John
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Worc'r
Forster, Henry William
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
Allen, Charles P. (Glouc., Stroud
Chapman, Edward
Fuller, J. M. F.
Allsopp, Hon. George
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Galloway, William Johnson
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Coddington, Sir William
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Godson, Sir Augustus Frederick
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Cohen, Benjamin Louis
Gore, Hn. G R C. Ormsby-(Salop.
Atherley-Jones, L.
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Gore, Hon. S. F. Ormsby-(Linc)
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Colville, John
Gorst, Rt. Hn. Sir John Eldon
Austin, Sir John
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Grant, Corrie
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Balcarres, Lord
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Green, Walford D. (Wednesb'ry)
Baldwin, Alfred
Craig, Robert Hunter
Greene, Sir E. W (B'ryS Edm'nds
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J. (Manch'r
Cranborne, Viscount
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Crombie, John William
Greene, W. Raymond- (Cambs.
Balfour, Maj. K. R. (Christch.
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Grenfell, William Henry
Banbury, Frederick George
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Gretton, John
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Groves, James Grimble
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Gunter, Sir Robert
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Davies, M. Vaughan-(Cardigan
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Bell, Richard
Denny, Colonel
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Bentinck, Lord Henry C.
Dickson, Charles Scott
Hain, Edward
Bignold, Arthur
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robert Wm.
Bill, Charles
Doughty, George
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'rd
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Harms worth, R. Leicester
Bond, Edward
Douglas, Charles M. (Lanark)
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Haslett, Sir James Horner
Bowles, T. Gibson (Ling's Lynn
Duncan, J. Hastings
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Brigg, John
Dunn, Sir William
Hayne, Rt. Hn. Charles Seale-
Broadhurst, Henry
Edwards, Frank
Hayter, Rt. Hn. Sir Arthur D.
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Elibank, Master of
Helder, Augustus
Brown, Alexander H. (Shropsh.
Fardell, Sir T. George
Helme, Norval Watson
Brunner, Sir John Tomlinson
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Henderson, Alexander
Bullard, Sir Harry
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Hermon-Hodge, Robert T.
Burt, Thomas
Fenwick, Charles
Hickman, Sir Alfred
Buxton, Sydney Charles
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Hoare, E. Brodie (Hampstead)
Caldwell, James
Finch, George H.
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich)
Campbell. Rt. Hn. J. A. (Glasgow
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Fisher, William Hayes
Hobhouse, Henry (Somerset, E.
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbyshire
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Hogg, Lindsay
Cawley, Frederick
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Holland, William Henry
service of the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1902, the sum of ;35,443,233 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund of the United Kingdom."
Resolution read a second time.
Motion made, and Question put, "That this House doth agree with the Committee in the said Rosolution."
The House divided:;Ayes, 302; Noes, 59. (Division List No. 280.)
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Nicholson, William Graham
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Horniman, Frederick John
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Sinclair, Capt John (Forfarshire
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
Norman, Henry
Smith, H C (Nor h'mb. Tyneside
Hoult, Joseph
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.)
Hozier, Hon. James Henry C.
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Smith, Hon. W. F. D. (Strand)
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Palmer, Sir Chas. M. (Durham
Soames, Arthur Wellesley
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Soares, Ernest J.
Jackson, Rt. Hon. Wm. Lawies
Parker, Gilbert
Spear, John Ward
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Parkes, Ebenezer
Spencer, Ernest (W. Bromwich)
Johnston, William (Belfast)
Partington, Oswald
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Paulton, James Mellor
Stock, James Henry
Joicey, Sir James
Pease, Herbert P. (Darlington)
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Jones, David Brynmor (Sw'nsea
Penn, John
Strachey, Edward
Jones, William (Carnarvonshire
Percy, Earl
Stroyan, John
Kenyon-Slaney. Col. W. (Salop.)
Philipps, John Wynford
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Kimber, Henry
Pierpoint, Robert
Talbot, Rt. Hn. J. G. (Oxf'd Univ
Kinloch, Sir John George Smyth
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Knowles, Lees
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr)
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Plummer, Walter R.
Thomas, F. Freeman-(Hastings)
Laurie, Lieut.-General
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Law, Andrew Bonar
Pretyman, Ernest George
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Price, Robert John
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
Lawson, John Grant
Pryce-Jones, Lt.-Col. Edward
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Purvis, Robert
Tuffnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Lee, Arthur H. (Hants, Fareham
Pym, C. Guy
Valentia, Viscount
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Quilter, Sir Cuthbert
Wallace, Robert
Leveson-Gower, Frederick N. S.
Rankin, Sir James
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.)
Lewis, John Herbert
Rasch, Major Frederic Carne
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Rea, Russell
Wanklyn, James Leslie
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Reckitt, Harold James
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Reid, James (Greenock)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Long, Et Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.)
Reid, Sir R. Threshie (Dumfries
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan)
Lowe, Francis William
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney)
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Renwick, George
Welby, Lt.-Col. A. C. E. (Taunton
Macdona, John Cumming
Rickett, J. Compton
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts.)
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Ridley, Hon. M. W. (Stalybridge)
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John Lloyd.
M'Crae, George
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Majendie, James A. H.
Rigg, Richard
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Manners, Lord Cecil
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. Chas. T.
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs)
Williams, Rt. Hn J Powell- (Birm.
Massey-Mainwaring, Hn. W. F.
Robertson, Herbert (Hackney)
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Mather, William
Robinson, Brooke
Wills, Sir Frederick
Maxwell, W. J H (Dumfriesshire
Roe, Sir Thomas
Wilson, A. Stanley (York, E. R.)
Mellor, Rt. Hon. John William
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Wilson, Fred. W. (Norfolk, Mid.)
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh, N.)
Milton, Viscount
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel W.
Wodehouse, Rt. Hon. E. R. (Bath,
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Round, James
Wolff, Gustav Wilhelm
Morgan, David J. (Walth'mstow
Russell, T. W.
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'ld
Morley, Charles (Breconshire)
Rutherford, John
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Morley, Rt. Hn. John (Montrose
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Wylie, Alexander
Morrell, George Herbert
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Yerburgh, Robert Armstrong
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Younger, William
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Sandys, Lt.-Col. Thos. Myles
Yoxall, James Henry
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Scott, Chas. Prestwich (Leigh)
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Sharpe, William Edward T.
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Sir
Myers, William Henry
Shaw, Charles Edw. (Stafford)
William Walrond and Mr.
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Anstruther.
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.)
Crean, Eugene
Flynn, James Christopher
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Cullinan, J.
Gilhooly, James
Blake, Edward
Daly, James
Hammond, John
Boland, John
Delany, William
Hardie, J. Keir (Merthyr Tydvil)
Boyle, James
Dillon, John
Hayden, John Patrick
Burns, John
Doogan, P. C.
Jordan, Jeremiah
Cameron, Robert
Duffy, William J.
Joyce, Michael
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Farrell, James Patrick
Kennedy, Patrick James
Cogan, Denis J.
Ffrench, Peter
Lundon, W.
Condon, Thomas Joseph
Field, William
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
M'Fadden, Edward
O'Doherty, William
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
M'Govern, T.
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
Redmond, William (Clare)
Mooney, John J.
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Murphy, John
O'Dowd, John
Sullivan, Donal
Nannetti, Joseph P.
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
White, Patrick (Meath, North)
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.
O'Kelly, Jas. (Roscommon, N.)
Wilson, John (Durham, Mid.)
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
O'Malley, William
Young, Samuel (Cavan, East)
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Mid
O'Mara, James
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Sir Thomas Esmonde and
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.)
Reddy, M.
Captain Donelan.
Bill ordered to be brought in by the Chairman of Ways and Means, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Mr. Austen Chamberlain.
FACTORY AND WORKSHOP ACTS AMENDMENT (EXPENSES).;REPORT.
Resolution reported;
"That it is expedient to authorise the payment, out of moneys to be provided by Parliament, of any expense incurred by the Secretary of State in any inquiry under the provisions of any Act of the present session to amend the Factory and Workshops Acts."
Resolution agreed to.
CREMATION BILL [Lords].
Order read, for further proceeding on consideration, as amended by the Standing Committee:;
The Clause (Definitions (Scotland);
In the application of this Act to Scotland;
The expression "burial authority" shall mean the parish council or town council of any parish or burgh as defined in Sections 2 and 3 of the Burial Grounds (Scotland) Act, 1855, or any Act omending the same.
The expression "the Local Government Board" shall mean the Local Government Board (Scotland);
The expression "Secretary of State" shall mean the Secretary of State for Scotland;(Mr. Renshaw.)
Read a second time on 19th June.
LORD HUGH CECIL (Greenwich) said he desired to know if it would be in order now to move that the clause ex-
tending the Bill to Scotland be postponed. The clause, having been read a second time, was part of the Bill, and he submitted it would be in order to move that it be postponed until the other clauses had been considered.
*MR. SPEAKER: That would not be in order.
LORD HUGH CECIL said he desired to move an Amendment in order to raise a question of some little interest. In the opinion of the Law Officers of Scotland the parish council was the proper authority to be entrusted with powers under the Act, and it was provided that in the application of the Act to Scotland the expression "burial authority" should mean the parish council. It appeared to him, merely from English experience, that it was very doubtful whether it would be wise to entrust parish councils in Scotland with power to build crematoria. That would be a very expensive matter, and a matter requiring some scientific knowledge, which was not ordinarily at the disposal of a parish council. He should have thought that it was open to doubt whether the parish authority was the proper authority to carry through such a work. Then there was the question of expense. He thought he was right in saying that a parish council was limited with reference to its rating power under the Local Government Act, and no provision, so far as he was aware, was included in the Bill for extending that power. It would, therefore, in his opinion, be better to confine the application of the Bill in Scotland to the county councils, which commanded the best advice, and had very much greater financial resources. The Bill had been extended to Scotland on the advice of his hon. friend and against his own wishes, and, having been extended, it
should be well considered. He begged to move to omit the words "parish councils or."
Amendment proposed to the proposed Clause;
"To leave out the words 'the parish council or.'";(Lord Hugh Cecil.)
Question proposed, "That the words 'the parish council or' stand part of the Clause."
MR. RENSHAW (Renfrewshire, W.) said he did not think the noble Lord quite apprehended the position in Scotland. He might explain that the parish council in Scotland was the burial authority, and the only authority which had any connection with the burial laws. There was no doubt whatever that under the regulations which would be laid down by the Secretary of State it would be impossible for small parish councils to apply the Act, but there were large parish councils in Scotland which would be able to avail of it. He would appeal to the noble Lord to withdraw his amendment, as the parish council was the only authority, outside the large boroughs, that could deal with the Bill in Scotland.
MR. BANBURY said that he was glad the Bill had been extended to Scotland, and, having been extended, they ought to make it workable. The noble Lord said that in his opinion the parish council would not be the proper authority, and he referred to the question of finance. His hon. friend who appealed to the noble Lord to withdraw his Amendment said that the small rural parish councils would be incompetent to carry out the provisions of the Act. Surely there was no use in putting in an authority which would be incompetent.
MR. RENSHAW said he did not suggest that the parish councils would be incompetent. What he did suggest was that many parish councils would not be large enough and would not have sufficient funds to meet the necessary regulations which would be laid down by the Secretary of State.
MR. BANBURY said he was wrong. He should have said that many of the parish councils would be unable to carry
out the provisions of the Act, but if they were unable they would also be incompetent. He would ask the Solicitor General for Scotland whether it would not be possible to substitute the county council in Scotland for the parish council. He thought that would probably carry out what the noble Lord had in view.
*THE SOLICITOR GENERAL FOR SCOTLAND (Mr. SCOTT DICKSON, Glasgow, Bridgeton): With reference to the suggestion to substitute the county council for the parish council, I may point out that in Scotland the management and control of burial grounds under the Burial Acts have hitherto been vested in bodies whose powers are derived entirely from the parish. They were the parochial boards and are now the parish councils, and I am afraid it would lead to confusion and very great difficulty in administration if a body with such a large area as a county council were to be brought in to deal with matters which are really matters of parochial administration. Therefore, looking at the legislation existing in Scotland in this matter, I think that the right of saying whether a crematorium should or should not be erected should be with the parish council, and not with the county council. Of course the House will observe that the clause is merely an empowering clause, not a compelling clause. With reference to the observations of the noble Lord, I think it may be left to the well-known caution of the Scotch that they will not indulge in any superfluity of extravagance.
EARL PERCY said of course it was very difficult for an Englishman, ignorant of the details of local government in Scotland, to discuss the matter. He understood there was substantial agreement between his noble friend and the hon. Gentleman in charge of the Bill. His noble friend said that the parish councils in many cases would not be the proper authority, and would not have sufficient funds to enable it to carry out the provisions of the Act. That was acknowledged by the hon. Member in charge of the Bill.
MR. RENSHAW said he begged to correct a misapprehension on the part of
the noble Lord. He was not in charge of the Bill in any way. An hon. Member opposite was in charge of it.
EARL PERCY said the hon. Member was in charge of the particular clause extending the Bill to Scotland. The hon. Member admitted that the small rural authorities would not be in a position to comply with the regulations which would be laid down by the Secretary of State, but he said there was no intermediary body between the large borough councils and the parish councils in Scotland. He suggested that it might be possible to accept his noble friend's Amendment if a limit of population were inserted, so as to provide that no parish council should be entrusted with powers under the Act unless it represented a certain population.
MR. JORDAN said the noble Lord would be well advised to withdraw his
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Colville, John
Gore, Hn G. R. C. Ormsby-(Salop
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Gore, Hon. S. F. Ormsby- (Linc.)
Aguew, Sir Andrew Noel
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Gorst, Rt. Hn. Sir John Eldon
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Craig, Robert Hunter
Grant, Corrie
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Crombie, John William
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Anstruther, H. T.
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Green, Walford D. (Wednesbury
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Cullinan, J.
Greene, Sir E W (B'ryS. Edm'nds
Atherley-Jones, L.
Dalkeith, Earl of
Greene, W. Raymond (Cambs.)
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Daly, James
Grenfell, William Henry
Baldwin, Alfred
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Groves, James Grimble
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Denny, Colonel
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Balfour, Maj K. R. (Christchurch
Dickson, Charles Scott
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Barry, Sir Francis T. (Windsor)
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Hammond, John
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Dillon, John
Hanbury, Rt. Hn. Robert Wm
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol)
Donelan, Captain A.
Hardie, J. Keir (Merthyr Tydvil)
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Doogan, P. C.
Harmsworth, R. Leicester
Bell, Richard
Douglas, Charles M. (Lanark)
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Blake, Edward
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Haslett, Sir James Horner
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Duncan, J. Hastings
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Boland, John
Dunn, Sir William
Helme, Norval Watson
Bond, Edward
Edwards, Frank
Hemphill, Rt. Hon. Charles H.
Brigg, John
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
Henderson, Alexander
Broadhurst, Henry
Evans, Sir Francis H (Maidstone
Hermon-Hodge, Robert Trotter
Brookfield, Colonel Montague
Farrell, James Patrick
Hill, Arthur
Bryce, Rt. Hon. James
Fellowes, Hn. Ailwyn Edward
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Bull, William James
Fenwick, Charles
Hobhouse, Henry (Somerset, E.
Bullard, Sir Harry
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Hogg, Lindsay
Burns, John
Ffrench, Peter
Holland, William Henry
Burt, Thomas
Finch, George H.
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Caldwell, James
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Horniman, Frederick John
Cameron, Robert
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Hoult, Joseph
Causton, Richard Knight
Fitzroy, Hon. Ed ward Algernon
Hozier, Hon. James Henry Cecil
Cawley, Frederick
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Fuller, J. M. F.
Jackson, Rt. Hon. Wm. Lawies
Channing, Francis Allston
Galloway, William Johnson
Johnston, William (Belfast)
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Johnstone Heywood (Sussex)
Collings, Rt. Hn. Jesse
Godson, Sir Augustus Frederick
Joicey, Sir James
Amendment. He seemed to be nervous about the extravagance of the parish councils, but if they had no money they would not be able to build crematoria. The noble Lord answered himself, because he said the parish councils would have no rating power to meet such expenditure, and if they had no rating power they could not expend the money.
MR. T. W. RUSSELL (Tyrone, S.) said if the provisions had been mandatory he could have understood the objection of the noble Lord, but the Bill was only an enabling Bill, and therefore the objection of the noble Lord did not apply at all. The truth of the matter was that a Scotch debate might often be dull, but it was never ridiculous until Englishmen interfered.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 249; Noes, 104 (Division List, No. 281.)
Jones, David Brynmor (Swans'a
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Mid
Soames, Arthur Wellesley
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny
Soares, Ernest J.
Jordan, Jeremiah
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.)
Spear, John Ward
Kearley, Hudson E.
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C R (Northants
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop.)
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N.
Stevenson, Francis L.
Kinloch, Sir John George S.
O'Malley, William
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Knowles, Lees
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Stirling-Maxwell, Sir John M.
Laurie, Lieut.- General
Palmer, Sir Charles M. (Durham
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Law, Andrew Bonar
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Strachey, Edward
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Parker, Gilbert
Sullivan, Donal
Lecky, Rt. Hn. Wm. Edw. H.
Parkes, Ebenezer
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Partington, Oswald
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Paulton, James Mellor
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings)
Leveson-Gower, Fred. N. S.
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Thompson, Dr E C (Monagh'n, N
Lewis, John Herbert
Pease, Herb. Pike (Darlington)
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Lloyd-George, David
Pease, Sir Joseph W. (Durham)
Tomkinson, James
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.)
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray
Lowe, Francis William
Price, Robert John
Tritton, Charles Ernest
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Pryce-Jones, Lt.-Col. Edward
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James (Kent)
Purvis, Robert
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Lundon, W.
Rankin, Sir James
Wason, John Cathcart (Orkney)
Macdona, John Cumming
Rea, Russell
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts.)
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Reckitt, Harold James
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
M'Crae, George
Reddy, M.
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne)
M'Govern, T.
Redmond, John E. (Waterford
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Manners, Lord Cecil
Redmond, William (Clare)
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Reid, James (Greenock)
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Reid, Sir R. Threshie (Dumfries)
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Mildmay, Francis Bingham
Rickett, J. Compton
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Milton, Viscount
Rigg, Richard
Wills, Sir Frederick
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. Chas. Thomson
Wilson, Fred. W. (Norfolk, Mid)
Mooney, John J.
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
Morley, Charles (Breconshire)
Robinson, Brooke
Wilson, John (Durham, Mid)
Morley, Rt. Hn. John (Montrose)
Roe, Sir Thomas
Wilson, J. W. (Worcestersh, N.)
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Morton, E. J. C. (Devonport)
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Mowbray, Sir Robert Gray C.
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Wolff, Gustav Wilhelm
Myers, William Henry
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel Walter
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'ld
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Russel, T. W.
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Nicholson, William Graham
Rutherford, John
Young, Samuel (Cavan, East)
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.)
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Yoxall, James Henry
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Schwann, Charles E.
Norman, Henry
Simeon, Sir Barrington
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr.
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Sinclair, Capt John (Forfarshire
Renshaw and Mr. Wallace.
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks.)
NOES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Kimber, Henry
Aird, Sir John
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Allsopp, Hon. George
Delany, William
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Lawson, John Grant
Austin, Sir John
Duffy, William J.
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Baird, John George Alexander
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Balcarres, Lord
Fergusson, Rt. Hn. Sir J. (Manc'r
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth)
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Field, William
Macartney, Rt. Hon. W. G. E.
Bentinck, Lord Henry C.
Fisher, William Hayes
M'Fadden, Edward
Bignold, Arthur
Flower, Ernest
Majendie, James A. H.
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Flynn, James Christopher
Massey-Mainwaring, Hn. W. F.
Boyle, James
Forster, Henry William
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Butcher, John George
Gilhooly, James
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J. A. (Glasgow
Greene, H. D. (Shrewsbury)
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow)
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Gretton, John
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Caxendish, V. C. W. (Derbyshire)
Gunter, Sir Robert
Murphy, John
Chapman, Edward
Hardy, L. (Kent, Ashford)
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Coddington, Sir William
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Cogan, Denis J.
Helder, Augustus
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich)
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Condon, Thomas Joseph
Hudson, George Bickersteth
O'Dowd, John
Cranborne, Viscount
Joyce, Michael
O'Mara, James
Crean, Eugene
Kennedy, Patrick James
O'Shaughnessy, P. C.
Penn John
Sandys, Lieut.-Col. Thorn. Myles
Welby, Lt.-Col. A. C. E. (Taunton
Percy, Earl
Saunderson, Rt. Hn. Col. Edw. J.
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Pierpoint, Robert
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John Lloyd
Pilkington, Lieut.-Col. Richard
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Whfte, Patrick (Meath, North)
Plummer, Walter R.
Smith, H. C. (North'mb. Tynesd.
Williams. Rt. Hn J Powell- (Birm.
Power, Patrick Joseph
Spencer, Ernest (W. Bromwich
Wylie, Alexander
Pretyman, Ernest George
Stanley, Hn. Arthur (Ormskirk
Yerburgh, Robert Armstrong
Rash, Major Frederick, Carne
Stock, James Henry
Younger, William
Renwick, George
Stroyan, John
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Talbot, Rt. Hn. J. G. (Oxf'd Univ.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
Rochie, John
Tufnel, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Lord Hugh Cecil and Mr.
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehonse)
Warde, Colonel C. E.
Banbury.
EARL PERCY said he desired to move in line 3, after the word "burgh," to insert "of more than 10,000 inhabitants." It was quite true that the clause was not mandatory, but merely permissive, but it was ridiculous to give power to a parish council to build a crematorium which had no power to raise the necessary money. Every parish of 10,000 inhabitants would, however, have power to raise sufficient money to cover any reasonable expenditure, and he ventured to think that the Amendment might be accepted.
Amendment proposed;
"After the word 'burgh,' to insert the words 'of more than ten thousand inhabitants.'";(Earl Percy.)
Question proposed, "That those words fee there inserted."
LORD HUGH CECIL said he could not conceive a more slovenly or clumsy way of legislating than passing a Bill giving all kinds of powers to an authority without inquiring whether that authority could use them or not. The hon. Member for South Tyrone conceived that because he represented an Irish constituency he was entitled to reprove Englishmen for discussing Scottish matters, but it was very difficult to accept that view. At any rate, hon. Members who understood Scottish institutions should have some regard to making the Bill a proper measure. No information had been given as to why his noble friend's Amendment should not be accepted, and up to the present they had not been treated to anything but severe silence, just as if, in discussing the powers of a parish council, they were trespassing on sacred ground, on which It was almost profane to enter. He hoped they would have a proper and
respectful answer to the argument of his noble friend.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT (Warwickshire, Rugby) said there was one condition which the House always insisted upon, and that was that when an hon. Member took part in a discussion he should have some elementary knowledge of the subject. The noble Lord who complained that the Amendment had been treated with severe silence said that the parish councils would have no power to provide funds for erecting crematoria.
LORD HUGH CECIL: It was stated in the last debate.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT said the statement was inaccurate. If the noble Lord had taken the trouble to inform himself on the matter, as he ought to have done before criticising the Bill, he would have found that every parish council had power to raise money by loan for certain purposes.
LORD HUGH CECIL asked what was the limit.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT said he declined to turn the House of Commons into an elementary school-room.
LORD HUGH CECIL said the hon. Gentleman accused him of being ignorant of the subject, but he himself would also appear to be ignorant of it.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT said that might be; but some Members of the House would, at any rate, know that he had given a great deal of attention to these matters. It seemed to him that the ignorance of some hon. Members was extraordinary. He only rose to make the suggestion that as this was a
practical discussion, he did not think hon. Members had a right to get up and expect to be instructed in details with which they ought to have acquainted themselves beforehand.
MR. GRIFFITH BOSCAWEN (Kent, Tunbridge) said he thought the position taken up by the hon. Member who had just spoken was very extraordinary. What had happened was that the hon. Member who introduced the new clause himself stated that the smaller parish councils would not have sufficient rating power to enable them to build crematoria. That was the only fact they had.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT said that what had been stated was that there were some parish councils so small that they would not have the power of raising the necessary funds, but that a very large proportion of the parish councils would.
MR. GRIFFITH BOSCAWEN said he was dealing with the fact as it had been
AYES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N.E.)
Hammond, John
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Hardy, Laurence(Kent, Ashf'd
Penn, John
Baldwin, Alfred
Hill, Arthur
Pierpoint, Robert
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Hoare, E. Brodie (Hampstead)
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Bignold, Arthur
Hope, J. F (Sheffield, Brightside
Plummer, Walter R.
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Power, Patrick Joseph
Butcher, John George
Johnstone, Heywood- (Sussex
Rasch, Major Frederic Carne
Caldwell, James
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W (Salop.
Renwick, George
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J A(Glasgow
Kimber, Henry
Richards, Henry Charles
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Knowles, Lees
Ridley, S. F. (Bethnal Green)
Churchill, Winston Spencer
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel Walter
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Lawson, John Grant
Sandys, Lt.-Col. Thos. Myles
Condon, Thomas Joseph
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Spencer, E. (W. Bromwich)
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Stanley, Hn. Arthur (Ormskirk
Delany, William
Loyd, Archie Kirkman
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Stock, James Henry
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
Lundon, W.
Stroyan, John
Farrell, James Patrick
Macartney, Rt. Hn. W G Ellison
Talbot, Rt. Hon. J. G. (Oxf'dU.)
Fergusson, Rt. Hn. Sir J. (Manc'r
Macdona, John Gumming
Walrond, Rt. Hn. Sir Wm. H.
Finch, George H.
Maconochie, A. W.
Warde, Colonel C. E.
Fisher, William Hayes
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire)
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E (Taunton
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Massey-Mainwaring, Hn. W. F
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Flower, Ernest
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Wharton, Rt. Hn. John Lloyd
Forster, Henry William
Murphy, J.
White, Patrick (Meath, N.)
Galloway, Wm. Johnson
Myers, William Henry
Gilhooly, James
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;
Greene, H. D. (Shrewsbury)
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Earl Percy and Mr. Griffith-
Grenfell, William Henry
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Boscawen.
Gunter, Sir Robert
Palmer, Sir Chas. M. (Durham
NOES.
Acland-Hood. Capt. Sir Alex F.
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Austin, Sir John
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Anstruther, H. T.
Bain, Colonel James Robert
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Baird, John George Alexander
Aird, Sir John
Atherley-Jones, L.
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Balfour, Maj. K R (Christchurch
stated by the hon. Member who introduced the clause. The clause extended the Bill to Scotland, and surely hon. Members had a right to discuss whether the means proposed were really adequate or not. They had been told that a large number of the parish councils would not be able to make use of the Act; why, then, should they be included. For his part, he would support the Amendment to limit the application of the Act to such authorities as could usefully make use of it.
MR. RENSHAW said he would appeal to the House to support the clause in the form in which it had been read a second time. There were grave objections in practice to putting in the Bill a limitation of population.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 88; Noes, 268. (Division List No. 282.)
Banbury, Frederick George
Grant, Corrie
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Barry, Sir Francis T. (Windsor)
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Green, Walford D. (Wednesb'y)
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Bell, Richard
Greene, W. Raymond-(Cambs.)
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Bentinck, Lord Henry C.
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.)
Bill, Charles
Groves, James Grimble
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Blake, Edward
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Norman, Henry
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Hain, Edward
Norton, Captain Cecil Wm.
Boland, John
Hardie, J. Keir(Merthyr Tydvil
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Bond, Edward
Harmsworth, R. Leicester
O'Brien, K. (Tipperary, Mid)
Boulnois, Edmund
Harris, Fredk. Leverton
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Bowles, T. Gibson (King's Lynn)
Haslett, Sir James Homer
O'Connor, James(Wicklow, W.
Boyle, James
Hay, Hon. Claude George
O'Doherty, William
Brigg, John
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
Broadhurst, Henry
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
O'Dowd, John
Brunner, Sir John Tomlinson
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir A. D.
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
Bullard, Sir Harry
Helme, Norval Watson
O'Kelly, James (Rosc'mm'n,N.
Burns, John
Hemphill, Rt. Hn. Chas. H.
O'Malley, William
Burt, Thomas
Henderson, Alexander
O'Mara, James
Cameron, Robert
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich)
Parker, Gilbert
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edward H.
Hogg, Lindsay
Partington, Oswald
Causton, Richard Knight
Holland, Wm. Henry
Paulton, James Mellor
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Horniman, Frederick John
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Cawley, Frederick
Hoult, Joseph
Pease, Herb. Pike (Darlington
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Hozier, Hn. Jas. Henry Cecil
Pease, Sir Joseph W. (Durham)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Channing, Francis Allston
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Price, Robert John
Chapman, Edward
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Pryce-Jones, Lt.-Col. Edw.
Coddington, Sir Wm.
Jackson, Rt. Hon. Wm. Lawies
Purvis, Robert
Cogan, Denis J.
Jacoby, James Alfred
Pym, C. Guy
Collings, Rt. Hn. Jesse
Johnston, Wm. (Belfast)
Rankin, Sir James
Colville, John
Joicey, Sir James
Rea, Russell
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Jones, David Brynm'r (Swans'a
Reckett, Harold James
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
Reddy, M.
Craig, Robert Hunter
Jordon, Jeremiah
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Crean, Eugene
Joyce, Michael
Redmond, William (Clare)
Crombie, John William
Kearley, Hudson E.
Reid, James (Greenock)
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Kennedy, Patrick James
Rickett, J. Compton
Crossley, Sir Savile
Kenyon, James (Lancs, Bury)
Ridley, Hn M. W. (Stalybridge)
Cullinan, J.
Kinloch, Sir John Geo. Smyth
Rigg, Richard
Dalkeith, Earl of
Kitson, Sir James
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Daly, James
Lambert, George
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs)
Denny, Colonel
Laurie, Lieut.-General
Robinson, Brooke
Dickson, Charles Scott
Law, Andrew Bonar
Roche, John
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Lawrence, W. F. (Liverpool)
Roe, Sir Thomas
Dillon, John
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Donelan, Captain A.
Lecky, Rt. Hn. Wm. Edw. H.
Ropner, Col. Robert
Doogan, P. C.
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Russell, T. W.
Douglas, Charles M. (Lanark)
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Rutherford, John
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Leng, Sir John
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Duffy, William J.
Lewis, John Herbert
Samuel, Harry S. (Limehouse)
Duncan, J. Hastings
Lock wood, Lt.-Col. A. R.
Schwann, Charles E.
Dunn, Sir Wm.
Lough, Thomas
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Edwards, Frank
Lowe, Francis William
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Evans, Sir Francis H. (Maidst'e)
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Fardell, Sir T. George
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Sinclair, Capt John (Forfarshire
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
M'Crae, George
Smith, H C (North'mb. T'nes'de
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
M'Fadden, Edward
Smith, Jas. Parker (Lanarks.)
Fenwick, Charles
M'Govern, T.
Soares, Ernest J.
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Mappin, Sir Frdk. Thorpe
Spear, John Ward
Ffrench, Peter
Mather, William
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C. R. (North'ts
Field, William
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Stevenson, Francis S.
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Meysey-Thomson, Sir H. M.
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Mildmay, Francis Bingham
Strachey, Edward
Fitzroy, Hon. Edw. Algernon
Milner, Rt. Hn. Sir Frederick G.
Sullivan. Donal
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Milton, Viscount
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Flynn, James Christopher
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Thomas, David Alf red (Merth'r
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
Mooney, John J.
Thomas, F. Freeman-(Hastings.
Fuller, J. M. F.
Morgan, David J. (Walthams'w
Thomas, J A (Glamorgan, Gow'r
Garfit, William
Morley, Charles (Breconshire)
Thomson, Dr E C (Monagh'n, N.
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Morrell, George Herbert
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Godson, Sir Augustus Frederick
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Tomkinson, James
Gore, Hn G R. C. Ormsby-(Salop
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
Williams, Rt. Hn J Powell-(Birm
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Wylie, Alexander
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Young, Samuel (Cavan, E.)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Wills, Sir Frederick
Younger, William
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan)
Wilson, Fred. W. (Norfolk, Mid
Yoxall, James Henry
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.)
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Wilson, John (Durham, Mid.)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne)
Wilson-Todd, Wm H. (Yorks.)
Mr. Renshaw and Mr.
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Wallace.
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Wolff, Gastav Wilhelm
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'd
MR. SCOTT DICKSON: The clause as it at present stands, that "the expression 'burial authority' shall mean the parish council or town council of any parish or burgh, as defined in Sections 2 and 3 of 'Burial Grounds (Scotland) Act, 1855,'" is not quite accurate. Neither of these bodies are defined in these sections. I propose to leave out the words "defined in Sections 2 and 3 of" for the purpose of substituting "as the case may be, vested with the powers and duties conferred by."
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex F.
Carson, Rt. Hn. Sir Edw. H.
Ffrench, Peter
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Cavendish, V. C. W (Derbyshire
Finch, George H.
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Cawley, Frederick
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Aird, Sir John
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Fisher, William Hayes
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Allen, Charles P (Glouc., Stroud
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Anson, Sir Wm. Reynell
Channing, Francis Allston
Fitzroy, Hon. Edw. A.
Anstruther, H. T.
Chapman, Edward
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Ashton, Thomas Gain
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Flower, Ernest
Atkinson, Rt. Hn. John
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Flynn, James Christopher
Austin, Sir John
Colville, John
Forster, Henry Wm.
Bain, Col. James Robert
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Foster, Sir W. (Derby County)
Baird, John G. Alexander
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Fuller, J. M. F.
Baldwin, Alfred
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Galloway, William Johnson
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Craig, Robert Hunter
Garfit, William
Balfour, Maj. K. R. (Christchch
Crombie, John William
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Banbury, Frederick George
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Godson, Sir Augustus Fredk.
Barry, Sir Francis T. (Windsor)
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Gore, Hn G R C. Ormsby-(Salop)
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Crossley, Sir Savile
Grant, Corrie
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Dalkeith, Earl of
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Bell, Richard
Daly, James
Green, W. D. (Wednesbury)
Bentinck, Lord Henry C.
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Greene, Sir E W (B'ry S Edm'nds
Bignold, Arthur
Denny, Colonel
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Blake, Edward
Dickson, Charles Scott
Grenfell, Wm. Henry
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Bond, Edward
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cock field
Gretton, John
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Donelan, Captain A.
Groves, James Grimble
Boulnois, Edmund
Doogan, P. C.
Gunter, Sir Robert
Brand, Hon. Arthur G.
Douglas, Chas. M. (Lanark)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Brigg, John
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Hain, Edward
Broadhurst, Henry
Duncan, J. Hastings
Hamilton, Marq. of (L'nd'nd'ry
Brookfield, Colonel Montagu
Dunn, Sir Wm.
Hammond, John
Bullard, Sir Harry
Edwards, Frank
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd
Burns, John
Elibank, Master of
Harms worth, R. Leicester
Burt, Thomas
Evans, Sir Francis H (Maidst'ne
Haslett, Sir James Homer
Butcher, John George
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Caldwell, James
Fenwick, Charles
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Cameron, Robert
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir Arthur D.
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J. A (Glasg'w
Fergusson, Rt. Hn. Sir J (Manc'r
Helme, Norval Watson
Amendment proposed;
"To leave out the words 'defined in sections two and three of,' and insert the words 'the case may be vested with the powers and duties conferred by.'";(Mr. Solicitor General for Scotland.)
Question, "That the words 'defined in Sections 2 and 3 of' stand part of the Clause," put, and negatived.
Question put, "That the words 'the case may be vested with the powers and duties conferred by' be there inserted."
The House divided:;Ayes, 309; Noes, 51. (Division List No. 283.)
Hemphill, Rt. Hn. Charles H.
Milton, Viscount
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Henderson, Alexander
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Samuel, Harry, S. (Limehouse)
Hermon-Hodge, Robert T.
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Sandys, Lieut.-Col. Thos. M.
Hill, Arthur
Mooney, John J.
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Hoare, E. Brodie (Hampstead)
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow
Shipman, Dr. John
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich)
Morgan, J. L. (Carmarthen)
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Hogg, Lindsay
Morley, Chas. (Breconshire)
Sinclair, Capt. J. (Forfarshire).
Holland, Wm. Henry
Morrell, George Herbert
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F
Smith, H C (N'rth'mb. Tyneside
Horniman, Frederick John
Morton, Arthur H. A (Deptford)
Soares, Ernest J.
Houldsworth, Sir W. Henry
Morton, Ed w. J. C. (Devonport)
Spear, John Ward
Hoult, Joseph
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C. R Northants
Hozier, Hon. James Henry Cecil
Myers, William Henry
Spencer, E. (W. Bromwich)
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Stanley, Hon. A. (Ormskirk)
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Stevenson, Francis S.
Jackson, Rt. Hn. Wm. Lawies
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Jacoby, James Alfred
Norman, Henry
Stock, James Henry
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Norton, Captain Cecil Wm.
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Jessel, Captain Herbert Merton
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Stroyan, John
Johnston, William (Belfast)
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Strutt, Hon. Chas. Hedley
Joicey, Sir James
O'Doherty, Wm.
Sullivan, Donal
Jones, David Brynm'r (Swansea
O'Malley, William
Talbot, Rt. Hn. J. G. (Oxf'd Uni.
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Jordan, Jeremiah
Palmer, Sir C. M. (Durham)
Thomas, David A. (Merthyr)
Kearley, Hudson
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Thomas, F. Freeman-(Hastings
Kennedy, Patrick James
Parker, Gilbert
Thomas, J A (Gl'morgan, Gower-
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury.
Parkes, Ebenezer
Thompson, Dr E C (Monagh'n, N
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop)
Partington, Oswald
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Kimber, Henry
Paulton, James Mellor
Thornton, Percy M.
Kinloch, Sir John George Smyth
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Tomkinson, James
Kitson, Sir James
Pease, Herbert Pike (Darlingt'n
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray.
Knowles, Lees
Pease, Sir Joseph W. (Durham)
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
Lambton, Hon. Frederick Wm.
Penn, John
Tufnell, Lt-Col. Edward
Lawrence, Wm. F. (Liverpool)
Percy, Earl
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.
Lawson, John Grant
Perks, Robert Wm.
Warde, Col. C. E.
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Pierpoint, Robert
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Lecky, Rt. Hn. William Edw. H.
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan)
Lee, A. H. (Hants, Fareham)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E (Taunton
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Plummer, Walter R.
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Wentworth, B. C. Vernon-
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Price, Robert John
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John L.
Leng, Sir John
Pryce-Jones, Lt.-Col. Edward
White, Luke (Yorks, E. R.)
Lewis, John Herbert
Purvis, Robert
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne)
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Pym, C. Guy
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Rankin, Sir James
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S.
Rea, Russell
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth.
Lough, Thomas
Reckitt Harold James
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Lowe, Francis William
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale
Reid, James (Greenock)
Wills, Sir Frederick
Lowther, Rt. Hn. Jas. (Kent)
Reid, Sir R. Threshie (Dumfries
Wilson, F. W. (Norfolk, Mid.)
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Renwick, George
Wilson, Hy. J. (York, W. R.).
Macartney, Rt. Hn. W. G. E.
Rickitt, J. Compton
Wilson, John (Durham, Mid.)
Macdona, John Gumming
Ridley, Hon. M. W. (St'lybr'dge
Wilson-Todd, W. H. (Yorks.)
Maconochie, A. W.
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath,
M'Crae, George
Rigg, Richard
Wolff, Gustav Wilhelm
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshre)
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'd,
Majendie, James A. H.
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Malcolm, Ian
Robinson, Brooke
Wylie, Alexander
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Roe, Sir Thomas
Young, Samuel (Cavan, East).
Massey-Mainwaring, Hn. W F.
Rollit, Sir Albert Kaye
Younger, William
Maxwell, W. J. H Dumfries-sh.
Ropner, Col. Robert
Yoxall, James Henry
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Rothschild, Hn. Lionel Walter
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;
Mildmay. Francis Bingham
Russell, T. W.
Mr. Renshaw and Mr.
Milner, Rt. Hn. Sir Fredk, F.
Rutherford, John
Wallace.
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Condon, Thomas Joseph
Field, William
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Cullinan, J.
Gilhooly, James
Boland, John
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Greene, W. Raymond-(Cambs.
Boyle, James
Delany, William
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Duffy, William J.
Hayden, John Patrick
Coddington, Sir William
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.).
Cogan, Denis J.
Farrell, James Patrick
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Richards, Henry Charles
Joyce, Michael
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Roche, John
Lambert, George
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
Shaw, Charles E. (Stafford)
Laurie, Lt.-General
O'Dowd, John
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Lundon, W.
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
Warner, Courtenay T.
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
O'Kelly, J. (Roscommon, N.)
White, Patrick (Meath, North)
M'Fadden, Edward
O'Mara, James
M'Govern T.
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
Murphy, John
Power, Patrick Joseph
Mr. Crean and Thomas
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Rasch, Major Frederic Carne
O'Donnell.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Reddy, M.
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Md
Redmond, William (Clare)
Clause, as amended, added.
*MR. LEES KNOWLES (Salford, W.): The new clause which I have now the honour to move must commend itself to the House. It is;
"No crematorium shall be constructed nearer to any dwelling house than two hundred yards, except with the consent in writing of the owner, lessee, and occupier of such house."
I think it would be very objectionable to place a crematory close to a private residence. It would offend the eye with its huge chimney, and offend the ear by the tolling of the bell. Moreover, a householder does not care to see funerals constantly passing close to his house. Then from a public point of view a crematory erected in a suburb might cause a distinct interference with the systematic growth of the locality, and our suburbs require every protection. I do not say that 200 yards is a proper distance, and I would be quite open to accept an amendment. I do not know how many of these crematories we are going to have placed in the land, especially if small public bodies are to have the power to raise money for building them. I do not say that they will necessarily be placed next to private dwellings or in our suburbs. I can imagine them being used as landmarks, and a crematory being erected on the heights of Snowdon, or of Helvellyn, or of Ben Nevis, or even on the top of Croagh Patrick. The 200 yards may appear to be an arbitrary distance, but I have taken it from Section 10 of the Cemeteries Clauses Act of 1847. In considering this matter I was very much interested in reading the report on the
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Allen, Chas. P. (Glouc., Stroud)
Anstruther, H. T.
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Allsopp, Hon. George
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Classes of Great Britain in 1843, which contains much information in regard to cemeteries. Great consideration was given to the situation in which cemeteries should be placed; and the report stated that, in general, public cemeteries should be placed to the east, north, or north-east of our towns, because the south and south-west winds were usually moist, and would carry the putrefactive gases over the town more readily than east, north, or north-east winds, which were dry. The same consideration ought to be given in regard to the situation of crematories. I beg to move;
New Clause (Site of Crematorium) brought up, and read the first time.;(Mr. Lees Knowles.)
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the Clause be read a second time."
THE SOLICITOR GENERAL (SIR EDWARD CARSON, Dublin University): So far as the Government is concerned we have no objection to this new clause. It is in accordance with the Cemeteries Clauses Act which raises exactly the same question, and it would be well to have a uniform area. I desire, however, to enter a protest against these places being called crematories, as they might be mixed up with creameries in Ireland.
Question put.
The House divided:;Aves, 293; Noes, 57. (Division List No. 284.)
Atherley-Jones, L.
Flower, Ernest
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Flynn, James Christopher
Macdona, John Cumming
Bain, Col. James Robert
Forster, Henry William
Maconochie, A. W.
Baldwin, Alfred
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey
Fuller, J. M. F.
M'Arthur, William (Cornw'll)
Balfoar, Maj. K R (Christchurch
Galloway, Wm. Johnson
M'Crae, George
Banbury, Frederick George
Garfit, William
M'Govern, T.
Barry, Sir Francis T. (Windsor)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Godson, Sir Augustus Frederick
Majendie, James A. H.
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Grant, Corrie
Malcolm, Ian
Bell, Richard
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Bentinck, Lord Henry C.
Greene, Sir E W (B'y S Edm'nds)
Massey-Mainwaring, Hn. W. F
Blake, Edward
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Maxwell, W J H (Dumfriesshire
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Grenfell, Wm. Henry
Mellor, Rt. Hon. John Wm.
Boulnois, Edmund
Gretton, John
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Brigg, John
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Mildmay, Francis Bingham
Broadhurst, Henry
Grey, Sir Edward (Berwick)
Milner, Rt. Hon. Sir Fred. G.
Brookfield, Col. Montagu
Groves, James Grimble
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Bullard, Sir Harry
Gunter, Sir Robert
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Burt, Thomas
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Mooney, John J.
Butcher, John George
Hain, Edward
Morgan, David J. (Walthamst.)
Caldwell, James
Hamilton, Marq of (L'donderry
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Cameron, Robert
Hammond, John
Morley, Charles (Breconshire)
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J A (Glasgow
Hardy, L. (Kent, Ashford)
Morrell, George Herbert
Carlile, William Walter
Harmsworth, R. Leicester
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport)
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbysh.)
Haslett, Sir James Horner
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Cawley, Frederick
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Myers, William Henry
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Helme, Norval Watson
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Hemphill, Rt. Hon. Chas. H.
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.
Channing, Francis Allston
Henderson, Alexander
Norman, Henry
Chapman, Edward
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Hill, Arthur
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Coddington, Sir William
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich)
O'Connor, J. (Wicklow, W.)
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
O'Doherty, William
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Hogg, Lindsay
O'Malley, William
Colville, John
Holland, William Henry
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Hope, J. F (Sheffield, Brightside
Palmer, Sir C. M. (Durham)
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Horniman, Frederick John
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
Parkes, Ebenezer
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Hoult, Joseph
Partington, Oswald
Craig, Robert Hunter
Hozier, Hon. James Henry C.
Paulton, James Mellor
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Waiden)
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Pease, Sir J. W. (Durham)
Crossley, Sir Savile
Joicey, Sir James
Penn, John
Dalkeith, Earl of
Jones, David B. (Swansea)
Percy, Earl
Daly, James
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Perks, Robert William
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Jordan, Jeremiah
Pierpoint, Robert
Denny, Colonel
Kearley, Hudson E.
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Dickson, Charles Scott
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W (Salop)
Plummer, Walter R.
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Kimber, Henry
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Dilke, Rt. Hon. Sir Charles
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Price, Robert John
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
Kinloch, Sir John Geo. Smyth
Pryce-Jones, Lt.-Col. Edw.
Donelan, Capt. A.
Kitson, Sir James
Purvis, Robert
Douglas, Charles M. (Lanark)
Lambton, Hon. Fredk. Wm.
Rea, Russell
Doxford, Sir William Theodore
Law, Andrew Bonar
Reckitt, Harold James
Dunn, Sir William
Lawson, John Grant
Redmond, J. E. (Waterford)
Edwards, Frank
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Redmond, William (Clare)
Elibank, Master of
Lecky, Rt. Hon. Wm. E. H.
Reid, James (Greenock)
Emmott, Alfred
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Renwick, George
Evans, Sir F. H. (Maidstone)
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Rickett, J. Compton
Fardell, Sir T. George
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Fenwick, Charles
Leng, Sir John
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith)
Lewis, John Herbert
Rigg, Richard
Fergusson, Rt. Hn. Sir J. (Manc'r
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Ffrench, Peter
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Roberts, John H. (Denbighs.)
Finch, George H.
Long, Rt. Hn. W. (Bristol, S.
Robinson, Brooke
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Lough, Thomas
Roe, Sir Thomas
Fisher, William Hayes
Lowe, Francis William
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Ropner, Col. Robert
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward Algernon
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James (Kent)
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel W.
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsm'th)
Rutherford, John
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Strutt, Hon. Chas. Hedley
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne-
Sandys, Lt.-Col. Thos. Myles
Sullivan, Donal
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Schwann, Charles E.
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Seton-Karr, Henry
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Sharpe, William Edw. T.
Thomas, F. Freeman-(Hastings
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Thomas, J A (Gl'm'rgan, Gower)
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Thompson, Dr E C (Monagh'n, N
Wills, Sir Frederick
Sinclair, Capt. John (Forfarsh.
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Wilson, Fred W. (Norfolk, Mid.
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Thornton, Percy M.
Wilson, Hy. J. (York, W. R.)
Smith, H C (Northmb, Tyneside
Tomkinson, James
Wilson, John (Durham, Mid.)
Smith, James Parker (Lanarks
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Soares, Ernest J.
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Spear, John Ward
Tufnell, Lt.-Col. Edward
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'd
Spencer, Rt. Hn C. R. (North'nts)
Vincent, Col. Sir C E H (Sheffield
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Stanley, Hon. A. (Ormskirk)
Wallace, Robert
Wyhe, Alexander
Stevenson, Francis S.
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
Stewart, Sir M. J. M'Taggart
Warde, Col. C. E.
Younger, William
Stock, James Henry
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Wason, E. (Clackmannan)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;
Strachey, Edward
Welby, Sir Charles G. E. (Notts.
Mr. Knowles and Mr.
Stroyan, John
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Griffith-Bowscawen.
NOES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N. E.)
Hayden, John Patrick
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Austin, Sir John
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Rasch, Maj. Frederic Carne
Bignold, Arthur
Joyce, Michael
Reddy, M.
Boland, John
Kennedy, Patrick James
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Boyle, James
Labouchere, Henry
Richards, Henry Charles
Brand, Hon. Arthur G.
Lambert, George
Roche, John
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Laurie, Lieut.-General
Shaw, Chas. Edw. (Stafford)
Condon, Thomas Joseph
Lundon, W.
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Cullinan, J.
M'Fadden, Edward
Sinclair, Louis (Romford
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Murphy, John
Warner, Thos. Courtenay T.
Dalziel, James Henry
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Welby, Lt.-Col. A C E. Taunton
Delany, William
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, S.)
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Doogan, P. C.
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipper'ry Mid
Wharton, Rt. Hn. John Lloyd
Duffy, William J.
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
White, Patrick (Meath, North).
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Farrell, James Patrick
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
Field, William
O'Dowd, John
Mr. Crean and Mr. Thos.
Gilhooly, James
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
O'Donnell.
Greene, Walford D (Wednesb'y
O'Kelly, J. (Roscommon, N.)
Greene, W. Raymond-(Cambs
O'Mara, James
Clause added.
MR. LEES KNOWLES moved to insert the following clause;
"A burial authority may accept a donation of land for the purpose of a crematorium, and a donation of money or other property for enabling them to acquire, construct, or maintain a crematorium."
He said the clause dealt with the law of mortmain, but he did not think it
AYES.
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir A. F.
Austin, Sir John
Bignold, Arthur
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Blake, Edward
Agnew, Sir Andrew Noel
Bain, Col. James Robert
Blundell, Col. Henry
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Boulnois, Edmund
Allen, Chas. P. (Glouc., Stroud)
Balfour, Major K. R. (Christch.)
Brand, Hon. Arthur G.
Allsopp, Hon. George
Banbury, Frederick George
Brigg, John
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Barry, Sir Francis T. (Windsor
Broadhurst, Henry
Atherley-Jones, L.
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Brookfield, Col. Montagu
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Bentinck, Lord Henry C.
Brown, George M. (Edinburgh,
needed any explanation; at any rate, he would not trouble the House with one.
Another clause (Donations of land, &amp;c.);(Mr. Lees Knowles);brought up, and read the first time.
Motion made, and Question put, "That the clause be read a second time."
The House divided:;Ayes, 299; Noes,. 51. (Division List No. 285.)
Brunner, Sir John Tomlinson
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Malcolm, Ian
Bullard, Sir Harry
Godson, Sir Augustus Fredk.
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Burt, Thomas
Grant, Corrie
Massey-Mainwaring, Hn. W. F.
Butcher, John George
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Maxwell, Rt. Hn. Sir H E (Wigt'n
Caldwell, James
Greene, Sir E. W. B'ry S. Edmnds
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfries-sh-
Cameron, Robert
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury
Mellor, Rt. Hn. John William
Campbell, Rt. Hn. J. A. (Glasgow
Grenfell, William Henry
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Carlile, William Walter
Gretton, John
Mildmay, Francis Bingham
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Milner, Rt. Hn. Sir Fredk. G.
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbyshire
Griffith, Ellis J.
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Cawley, Frederick
Groves, James Grimble
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Cayzer, Sir Charles William
Gunter, Sir Robert
Montagu, Hn. J. Scott (Hants)
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Mooney, John J.
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Hain, Edward
Morgan, David J. (Walthm'w
Chamberlain, J. Austen (Worc'r
Hammond, John
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen
Channing, Francis Allston
Hardy, Laurence (Kent Ashf'd
Morley, Chas. (Breconshire)
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Harmsworth, R. (Leicester)
Morrell, George Herbert
Chapman, Edward
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Morris, Hn. Martin Henry F.
Cochrane, Hn. Thos. H. A. E.
Haslett, Sir James Horner
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Coddington, Sir William
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Morton, Edw. J. C. (Devonport
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Chas. Seale-
Murray, Chas. J. (Coventry)
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Helme, Norval Watson
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Colville, John
Henderson, Alexander
Myers, William Henry
Compton, Lord Alwyne
Hermon-Hodge, Robert Trotter
Newdigate, Francis Alexander
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Hill, Arthur
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Corbett, A. Cameron (Glasgow)
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich)
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.)
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.
Norman, Henry
Craig, Robert Hunter
Hogg, Lindsay
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Holland, William Henry
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield, Brightside
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.)
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Horniman, Frederick John
O'Doherty, William
Crossley, Sir Savile
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
O'Malley, William
Dalkeith, Earl of
Hozier, Hon. Jas. Henry Cecil
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Daly, James
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Palmer, Sir Charles M. (Durham
Dalziel, James Henry
Jessel, Captain Herbert Merton
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Denny, Colonel
Jones, David (Brynmr Swansea
Partington, Oswald
Dewar, T. R (T'rH'ml'ts, S. Geo.)
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Dickson, Charles Scott
Jordan, Jeremiah
Pease, Herbert Pike (Darlington
Dickson-Poynder, Sir John P.
Kearley, Hudson E.
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Kenyon, James (Lancs., Bury)
Pease, Sir Joseph W. (Durham)
Dilke, Rt. Hon. Sir Charles
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. W. (Salop
Penn, John
Dillon, John
Kimber, Henry
Percy, Earl
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph Cockfield
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Pierpoint, Robert
Dixon-Hartland, Sir Fred Dixon
Kinloch, Sir John Geo. Smyth
Pilkington, Lieut.-Col. Richard
Donelan, Captain A.
Kitson, Sir James
Plummer, Walter R.
Douglas, Charles M. (Lanark)
Lambton, Hon. Fredk. Wm.
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Doxford, Sir Wm. Theodore
Laurie, Lieut-General
Price, Robert John
Duncan, J. Hastings
Lawson, John Grant
Pryce-Jones, Lt.-Col. Edward
Dunn, Sir William
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Purvis, Robert
Edwards, Frank
Lecky, Rt. Hn. Wm. Edw. H.
Rankin, Sir James
Elibank, Master of
Legge, Col. Hon. Heneage
Rea, Russell
Emmott, Alfred
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Evans, Sir Francis H. (Maidstone
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Reid, James (Greenock)
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Leng, Sir John
Reid, Sir R. Threshie (Dumfries)
Fardell, Sir T. George
Lewis, John Herbert
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Farquharson, Dr. Robert
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Renwick, George
Fenwick, Charles
Lloyd-George, David
Rickett, J. Compton
Ferguson, R. C. Munro (Leith
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Ridley, Hon. M. W. (Stalybridge
Ffrench, Peter
Lough, Thomas
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green)
Field, William
Lowe, Francis William
Rigg, Richard
Finch, George H.
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Robinson, Brooke
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Lowther, Rt. Hon. Jas. (Kent
Roe, Sir Thomas
Fisher, William Hayes
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsmouth
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
FitzGerald, Sir Robert Penrose-
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Fitzroy, Hon. Edw. Algernon
Macartney, Rt. Hn. W. G. Ellison
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel Walter
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Macdona, John Cumming
Russell, T. W.
Flower, Ernest
Maconochie, A. W.
Rutherford, John
Forster, Henry William
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alexander
Foster, Sir Walter (Derby Co.)
M'Crae, George
Sandys, Lieut.-Col. Thos. Myles-
Fuller, J. M. F.
M'Govern, T.
Schwann, Charles E.
Galloway, William Johnson
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire)
Seely, Charles Hilton (Lincoln)
Garfit, William
Majendie, James A. H.
Simeon, Sir Barrington
Sinclair, Capt John (Forfarshire
Thornton, Percy M.
Willoughby de Eresby, Lord
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Tollemache, Henry James
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Smith, H. C (North'mb. Tynesi'e
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray
Wills, Sir Frederick
Soares, Ernest J.
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
Wilson, Fred. W. (Norfolk, Mid
Spear, John Ward
Tufnell, Lt-Col. Edward
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.
Spencer, Rt. Hn. C. R (Northants
Vincent, Col Sir C. E. H (Sheffield
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Stanley, Hn. Arthur (Ormskirk
Wallace, Robert
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Stewart, Sir Mark J. M'Taggart
Warde, Colonel C. E.
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath)
Stock, James Henry
Warner, Thos. Courtenay T.
Wolff, Gustav Wilhelm
Stone, Sir Benjamin
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Woodhouse, Sir J T. (Hudd'rsfid
Strachey, Edward
Wason, Eugene (Clackmannan
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Strutt, Hon. Chas. Hedley
Weir, James Galloway
Wylie, Alexander
Sullivan, Donal
Welby, Sir Chas. G. E. (Notts.
Young, Samuel (Cavan, E.)
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Younger, William
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Yoxall, James Henry
Thomas, F. Freeman-(Hastings)
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-un-Lyne
Thomas, J. A. Glamorgan Gow'r
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;Mr.
Thompson, Dr E C (Monaghan N
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Knowles and Mr. Griffith-
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Boscawen.
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.)
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
O'Mara, James
Baird, John George Alexander
Joyce, Michael
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Baldwin, Alfred
Kennedy, Patrick James
Paulton, James Mellor
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Lambert, George
Power, Patrick Joseph
Boland, John
Law, Andrew Bonar
Rasch, Major Frederic Carne
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Lundon, W.
Reddy, M.
Cogan, Denis J.
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Redmond, Wm. (Clare)
Condon, Thomas Joseph
M'Fadden, Edward
Richards, Henry Charles
Cullinan, J.
Murphy, John
Roche, John
Delany, William
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Shaw, Chas. Edw. (Stafford)
Doogan, P. C.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Duffy, William J.
O'Brien, Kendal (Tipperary Mid
Shipman, Dr. John G.
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Farrell, James Patrick
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Welby, Lt.-Col. A. C. E (Taunton)
Gilhooly, James
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
White, Patrick (Meath, North)
Green, Walford D. (Wednesbury
O'Dowd, John
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
Green, W. Raymond- (Cambs.)
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
Mr. Crean and Mr. Thomas
Hay den, John Patrick
O'Kelly, James (Roscommon, N.
O'Donnell.
Clause added.
MR. MACARTNEY (Antrim, S.) moved the following clause;
"In the application of this Act to Ireland the expression 'burial authority' shall mean the urban sanitary authority or the rural sanitary authority as defined in Sections 22 and 33 of the Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898; the expressions 'the Local Government Board' and 'the Secretary of State' shall mean the Local Government Board (Ireland)."
The only argument which he thought it necessary to advance in support of this clause was that the reasons which rendered it desirable that crematoriums should be established in England and Scotland applied equally to Ireland. He desired to correct a misapprehension which arose from a statement made in the Grand Committee. An hon. Member there said there were no burial boards in Ireland. But in that he was wrong, for boards had existed since
1856 which exercised the powers of burial boards in the same way as in England and Scotland.
Another clause (Definitions (Ireland);(Mr. Macartney);brought up, and read the first time.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the clause be read a second time."
SIR WALTER FOSTER (Derbyshire, Ilkeston) said that, being in charge of the Bill, he desired to correct the statement made by the right hon. Gentleman opposite as to what took place in the Grand Committee. There was no question as to the non-existence of burial boards in Ireland. It was never the intention of anyone connected with the Bill to extend its provisions to Ireland. He objected in the strongest way to its being extended to that country;
he had the greatest sympathy with those who objected to the extension, and he hoped his hon. friends on that side of the House would assist him in resisting the proposal. Ireland had unfortunately a smaller population than any other part of the United Kingdom. It was only in dense populations that the Bill was desirable in the interests of public health, and he had no desire to force it upon any community, the greater portion of which was opposed to it.
MR. JOHN REDMOND (Waterford) could not conceive it possible that the House of Commons would force the Bill on Ireland against what was practically the opinion of the whole of the people of the country. The hon. Member who had moved the Amendment was no doubt an Irishman, but if a division were taken it would be seen that there was an overwhelming majority of opinion of Irish Members sitting in every quarter of the House against the Bill. It was never seriously suggested before the Committee that it should be extended to Ireland, and when an Amendment was moved to extend it to Scotland he opposed it, very largely on the ground that the matter had not been discussed by the Committee, and because he did not think it fair at the last moment to spring the proposal upon the Committee, especially as he had not had an opportunity of ascertaining what was the view of the majority of Scotch Members. He was, therefore, perfectly consistent in taking the same position now in regard to Ireland. It seemed to him absolutely impossible to entertain the proposal seriously. The application of the Bill to Ireland would undoubtedly for most deeply resented by an overwhelming majority of the people. It would be a shock to their feelings. Anyone who knew the country knew that the religious feeling of the great majority would be outraged by the application of the Bill to their country, and without asking whether that feeling was reasonable or not, it would be a monstrous thing at the last moment if this was forced upon Ireland against the protest of the overwhelming majority of Irish Members, that he trusted the House of Commons would have more fairness and more common sense than to attempt to do anything of the kind.
SIR EDWARD CARSON: I hope the House will reject the Amendment. Let me remind hon. Members what is the real object of this Bill. Cremation is existent in England and Scotland, it can be carried on without any kind of interference by any authority, and I say it is a matter of importance, seeing that the practice is growing, that there should be some supervision by a Government department of the conditions under which bodies are burned. But no such necessity exists in Ireland. I do not believe there is a single crematorium in that country, neither is there any system of burning bodies. If that is so, why should we, in the face of the opposition of the greater part of the Irish Members, burden the Bill by including Ireland? Do not let us allow ourselves to be led away from what are the real objects of the Bill by attempting to apply to Ireland a state of affairs in no way applicable to that country.
*MR. HEMPHILL joined in the protest of the right hon. Gentleman opposite against the extension of this Bill to Ireland, where such a course would create the greatest possible revulsion of feeling. He had never heard of a single case of cremation in Ireland, although the practice was common in England. They ought not, at the instance of a small handful of Members, make a change which would be so repugnant to the feelings of the Irish people.
MR. MORRIS (Galway), speaking as an Irishman, urged the House not to accept the proposal, which was positively repugnant to the ideas of the Irish people, who possessed strong reverential, conscientious feelings on these questions. It was not the case that the reasons which justified the application of the Bill to England and Scotland applied equally to Ireland. There might be over-population in parts of the former countries, but in Ireland emigration was on the increase, and the population was decreasing. The least they could do for those who elected to remain in their native country was to ensure their decent burial in mother earth.
MR. GRIFFITH BOSCAWEN could not understand the objection to the clause. The Bill was purely optional,
and it was ridiculous to talk of forcing it on Ireland. How could they enforce a purely optional clause? They had been told that the Irish people did not want the Bill, but, after all, the object was merely to regulate the use of crematoria, and if, as was quite possible, one were ever set up in Ireland it ought to be subject to supervision in the same way as those in England and Scotland. He hoped his right hon. friend would press his clause to a division.
MR. BANBURY agreed with the last speaker. There was no desire to force anything disagreeable on Ireland, but they had been warned that by means of cremation crime might be concealed, and any legislation calculated to prevent the concealment of crime was equally good for England, Scotland, and Ireland. The Bill did not compel the establishment of crematoria; it simply provided for their proper supervision when set up. It was purely optional in its operation.
LORD HUGH CECIL said he had listened with great attention to the remarks of the hon. Member for Waterford, and he was sure the House would desire to attach the utmost weight to the views of Irish representatives on Irish questions. But he would like to point out that this was not a Bill to establish crematoria in Ireland. The hon. Member's objection was really an objection to the practice of cremation, which, no doubt, was opposed to the ideas of the majority of the Irish people. But this
AYES.
Allsopp, Hon. George
Dewar, T. R. (T'rH'ml'ts, S. Geo.
Greville, Hon. Ronald
Bain, Col. James Robert
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Hain, Edward
Baird, John George Alex.
Dilke, Rt. Hon. Sir Charles
Hamilton, Marq of (L'donderry)
Balfour, Maj K. R (Christch'rch)
Dimsdale, Sir Joseph C.
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashf'd)
Banbury, Frederick George
Dixon-Hartland, Sir Fred. D.
Haslett, Sir James Horner
Barry, Sir F. T. (Windsor)
Doxford, Sir William T.
Henderson, Alexander
Boulnois, Edmund
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Hermon-Hodge, Robt. Trotter
Brymer, William Ernest
FitzGerald, Sir R. Penrose-
Hoare, Sir Samuel (Norwich
Carlile, William Walter
Fitzroy, Hon. Edward A.
Hobhouse, C. E. H. (Bristol, E.)
Cavendish, V. C. W. (Derbysh.)
Flower, Ernest
Hoult, Joseph
Cecil, Lord Hugh (Greenwich)
Galloway, William Johnson
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham)
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Garfit, William
Hozier, Hn. James Henry Cecil
Coghill, Douglas Harry
Gibbs, Hn. A. G. H. (City of Lond.
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Corbett, A. C. (Glasgow)
Godson, Sir Augustus F.
Jackson, Rt. Hon. Wm. Lawies
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Graham, Henry Robert
Johnston, William (Belfast)
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Gray, Ernest (West Ham)
Kimber, Henry
Cross, Alexander (Glasgow)
Green, W. D. (Wednesbury)
King, Sir Henry Seymour
Crossley, Sir Savile
Greene, Sir E W (B'ryS Edm'nds
Laurie, Lt.-General
Dalkeith, Earl of
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury)
Leng, Sir John
Davies, Sir H. D. (Chatham)
Greene, W. Raymond-(Cambs.
Loder, Gerald Walter Erskine
Denny, Col.
Gretton, John
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James (Kent).
Bill did not come within the scope of that objection. Still, the objection of hon. Members below the gangway opposite were much more reasonable than that put forward by hon. Gentlemen above the gangway. As to the point of population, the Bill had been extended to Orkney and Shetland, so that it did not lie in the mouths of the promoters of the Bill to say that it should not be extended to Ireland. There were portions of that country which were very populous indeed;Belfast, for instance. There was no opposition to the Bill in the north of Ireland. No doubt in three parts of the country the Bill would be a dead letter, but that was no reason why it should not be applied to the neighbourhood of Belfast, as well as to Glasgow. He could understand the opposition of the Irish Members below the gangway, but the arguments of those above the gangway deserved no respect whatever.
It being half-past Five of the clock, Mr. SPEAKER proceeded to interrupt the Business.
Whereupon Sir WALTER FOSTER rose in his place, and claimed to move, "That the Question be now put"; but Mr. Speaker withheld his assent, because he was of opinion that the House was prepared to come to an immediate decision without that motion.
Question put.
The House divided:;Ayes, 113; Noes, 251. (Division List No. 286.)
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsm'th)
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Stanley, Hon. A. (Ormskirk)
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Stone, Sir Benjamin
MacIver, David (Liverpool)
Pierpoint, Robert
Thornton, Wm. Edw. Murray
Maconochie, A. W.
Pilkington, Lt.-Col. Richard
Vincent, Col. Sir C E H (Sheffield
M'Arthur, Charles (Liverpool)
Pryce-Jones, Lt.-Col. Edward
Warde, Col. C. E.
M'Laren, Chas. Benjamin
Purvis, Robert
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Rankin, Sir James
Welby, Sir C. G. E. (Notts.)
Mildmay, Francis Bingham
Remnant, James Farquharson
Willoughby de Eresby. Lord
Milner, Rt. Hon. Sir Frederick G.
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Stalybridge
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H. (Yorks.)
Montagu, G. (Huntingdon)
Roe, Sir Thomas
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Montagu, Hon. J. Scott (Hants.)
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Wolff, Gustav Wilhelm
Morrell, George Herbert
Ropner, Col. Robert
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Morton, A. H. A. (Deptford)
Sadler, Col. Samuel A.
Wylie, Alexander
Murray, Col. W. (Bath)
Sandys, Lt.-Col. Thos. Myles
Younger, William
Myers, William Henry
Seely, Chas. Hilton (Lincoln)
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;
Newdigate, Francis A.
Seton-Karr, Henry
Mr. Macartney and Mr. Griffith-Boscawen.
Nicol, Donal Ninian
Simeon, Sir Barrington
NOES.
Abraham, William (Cork, N. E.
Cullinan, J.
Horniman, Frederick John
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Cust, Henry John C.
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Hy.
Agg-Gardner, James Tynte
Dalrymple, Sir Charles
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Allan, William (Gateshead)
Daly, James
Jessel, Capt. Herb. Merton
Allen, Chas. P. (Glouc., Stroud
Dalziel, James Henry
Johnstone, Heywood (Sussex)
Ambrose, Robert
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Joicey, Sir James
Ashton, Thomas Gair
Delany, William
Jones, David B. (Swansea)
Atherley-Jones, L.
Dickson, Charles Scott
Jones, Wm. (Carnarvonshire)
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. John
Dillon, John
Jordan, Jeremiah
Austin, Sir John
Donelan, Captain A.
Joyce, Michael
Bagot, Capt. Josceline Fitz Roy
Doogan, P. C.
Kearley, Hudson E.
Baldwin, Alfred
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers-
Kennedy, Patrick James
Balfour, Capt. C. B. (Hornsey)
Donglas, Chas. M. (Lanark)
Kenyon, J. (Lancs., Bury)
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Duffy, William J.
Keswick, William
Bayley, Thomas (Derbyshire)
Duncan, J. Hastings
Kinloch, Sir John George S.
Beach, Rt. Hn. Sir M. H. (Bristol
Dunn, Sir William
Kitson, Sir James
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Edwards, Frank
Knowles, Lees
Bentinck, Lord Henry C.
Elibank, Master of
Lambert, George
Bignold, Arthur
Emmott, Alfred
Law, Andrew Bonar
Bigwood, James
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
Lawson, John Grant
Blake, Edward
Evans, Sir Francis H. (Maidst'ne
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Evans, Samuel T. (Glamorgan)
Leigh, Sir Joseph
Boland, John
Farrell, James Patrick
Leigh-Bennett, Henry Currie
Boyle, James
Fenwick, Charles
Lewis, John Herbert
Brigg, John
Ferguson, R. C. M. (Leith)
Llewellyn, Evan Henry
Broadhurst, Henry
Fergusson, Rt. Hn Sir J. (Manc'r)
Lough, Thomas
Brookfield, Col. Montagu
Ffrench, Peter
Lowe, Francis William
Brown, George M. (Edinburgh)
Field, William
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Brunner, Sir John Tomlinson
Finlay, Sir Robert Bannatyne
Lundon, W.
Bullard, Sir Harry
Fisher, William Hayes
Macdona, John Cumming
Burns, John
Flannery, Sir Fortescue
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Burt, Thomas
Fletcher, Sir Henry
M'Crae, George
Butcher, John George
Flynn, James Christopher
M'Fadden, Edward
Buxton, Sydney Charles
Fuller, J. M. F.
M'Govern, T.
Caldwell, James
Gilhooly, James
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire
Cameron, Robert
Gladstone, Rt. Hn. Herbert J.
Malcolm, Ian
Campbell, Rt. Hn J A. (Glasgow)
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Campbell, John (Armagh S.)
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Martin, Richard Biddulph
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir Edw. H.
Grant, Corrie
Mellor, Rt. Hon John William
Carvill, Patrick Geo. Hamilton
Grenfell, William Henry
Meysey-Thompson, Sir H. M.
Cawley, Frederick
Griffith, Ellis J.
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Cayzer, Sir Chas. Wm.
Groves, James Grimble
Mooney, John J.
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Gunter, Sir Robert
Morgan, D. J. (Walthamstow)
Chamberlain, J. A. (Worc'r.)
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Morgan, J. L. (Carmarthen)
Channing, Francis Allston
Hammond, John
Morley, Charles (Breconshire)
Chapman, Edward
Harmsworth, R. Leicester
Morley, Rt. Hn. J. (Montrose
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Harris, Frederick Leverton
Morris, Hon. Martin H. F.
Cogan, Denis J.
Hay, Hon. Claude George
Murphy, J.
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Hayden, John Patrick
Murray, Rt. Hn. A. G. (Bute)
Colville, John
Hayne, Rt. Hon. Charles Seale-
Murray, Charles J. (Coventry)
Condon, Thomas Joseph
Hayter, Rt. Hon. Sir A. D.
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Craig, Robert Hunter
Helme, Norval Watson
Nolan, Col. John P. (Galway, N.
Crean, Eugene
Hemphill, Rt. Hon. Chas. H.
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Crombie, John Wm.
Hogg, Lindsay
Norman, Henry
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
Hope, J. F. (Sheffield Brightside
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Nussey, Thomas Willans
Redmond, Wm. (Clare)
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
O'Brien, Kendal (T'pp'r'ry Mid.
Reid, Sir J. T. (Dumfries)
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Thomas, F. Freeman- (Hastings
O'Brien, P. J. (Tipperary, N.)
Renwick, George
Thomas, J A (Glamorg'n, Gower
O'Connor, James (Wicklow, W.
Richards, Henry Charles
Thompson, Dr E C (Monagh'n, N
O'Doherty, William
Rickett, J. Compton
Thorburn, Sir Walter
O'Donnell, John (Mayo, S.)
Rigg, Richard
Tomkinson, James
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Ritchie, Rt. Hn. C. Thomson
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
O'Dowd, John
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
O'Kelly, Conor (Mayo, N.)
Roche, John
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S)
O'Kelly, Jas. (Roscommon, N.)
Rothschild, Hon. Lionel W.
Warner, Thomas Courtenay T.
O'Malley, William
Round, James
Wason, E. (Clackmannan)
O'Mara, James
Russell, T. W.
Weir, James Galloway
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Rutherford, John
Wentworth, Bruce C. Vernon-
Palmer, Sir Charles M. (Durham
Schwann, Charles E.
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Shaw, Charles Edward (Stafford
White, Patrick (Meath, N.)
Partington, Oswald
Sheehan, Daniel Daniel
Whiteley, H. (Ashton-u.-Lyne
Paulton, James Mellor
Sinclair, Capt. John (Forfarsh.
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Pease, Alfred E. (Cleveland)
Sinclair, Louis (Romford)
Williams, Osmond (Merioneth)
Pease, Herbt, P. (Darlington)
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Willox, Sir John Archibald
Pease, J. A. (Saffron Walden)
Smith, H C (North'mb., T'neside
Wills, Sir Frederick
Pease, Sir J. W. (Durham)
Smith, James P. (Lanarks.)
Wilson, Fred. W. (Norfolk, Mid
Peel, Hn. Wm. Robt. Wellesley
Soares, Ernest J.
Wilson, John (Durham Mid.)
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Spear, John Ward
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Speneer, Rt. Hn C R (Northants.)
Woodhouse, Sir J T (Huddersf'd
Price, Robert John
Stewart, Sir M. J. M'Taggart
Young, Samuel (Cavan, E.)
Rasch, Major Frederick Carne
Stock, James Henry
Rea, Russell
Strachey, Edward
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
Reddy, M.
Strutt, Hon. Charles Hedley
Sir Walter Foster and
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Sullivan, Donal
Mr. Wallace.
Further consideration deferred till Wednesday next.
NATIONAL GALLERY (PURCHASE OF ADJACENT LAND) [EXPENSES].
Considered in Committee:;.
(In the Committee.)
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That it is expedient to authorise the payment, out of moneys to be provided by Parliament, of all Expenses incurred by the Commissioners of Works under any Act of the present session for the acquisition of certain land, near the National Gallery in London, and for other purposes connected therewith.";(Mr. Akers-Douglas.)
Whereupon Motion made, and Question, "That the Chairman do report progress; and ask leave to sit again" (Sir Thomas Esmonde);put, and agreed to.
Committee report progress; to sit again to-morrow.
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT (RESIGNATION OF SEATS) BILL.
Order for Second Reading read, and discharged; Bill withdrawn.
MEAT MARKING (IRELAND) BILL.
Read a second time, and committed for to-morrow.
YOUTHFUL OFFENDERS [EXPENSES].
Committee to consider of authorising the payment, out of moneys to be provided by Parliament, of contributions towards the cost of maintaining in custody children or young persons under any Act of the present session to amend the law relating to Youthful Offenders (King's recommendation signified), to-morrow.;(Mr. Secretary Ritchie.)
CONSOLIDATED FUND (No. 2) BILL.
"To apply a sum out of the Consolidated Fund to the service of the year ending on the thirty-first day of March, one thousand nine hundred and two," presented, and read the first time; to be read a second time to-morrow.
HOUSE OF COMMONS ACCOMMODATION.
Report, with Minutes of Evidence and Special Report, brought up, and read.
Reports to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 234.]
LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 9) BILL.
Reported, with an amended title (Provisional Order relating to Aylesbury
(Rural) not confirmed; remaining Orders confirmed]; Report to lie upon the Table.
Bill, as amended, to be considered to-morrow.
BIGGLESWADE WATER BOARD BILL.
FAVERSHAM WATER BILL [Lords].
SHEFFIELD CORPORATION BILL.
Reported, with Amendments; Reports to lie upon the Table, and to be printed.
PRIVATE BILLS (GROUP O).
Sir JAMES KITSON reported from the Committee on Group O of Private Bills, That at the meeting of the Committee this day a communication was received from Mr. Burke, one of the Members of the said Committee, stating that he was unable, on account of ill-health, to attend the Committee this day.
Report to lie upon the Table.
Adjourned at ten minutes before Six of the clock.
APPENDIX I.
PUBLIC BILLS
DEALT WITH IN VOLUME XCV.
Those marked thus * are Government Bills. The figures in parentheses in the last column relate to the page in this volume. "[H.L.]" following the title indicates that the Bill originated in the Lords.
(A.) HOUSE OF LORDS.
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
Bishopric of Southward [H.L.]
Archbishop of Canterbury
Committee 11 June (7); Report 13 June (217); Read 3a17 June (524)
*Civil List
Marquess of Salisbury
Read 1a20 June (882); Read 2a21 June (1025); Committee, Report, 24 June (1185); Read 3a25 June 1350
Convocations of the Clergy [H.L.]
Archbishop of Canterbury
Read 2a13 June (217); Committee, Report, 17 June (524)
County Councils (Bye-laws [H.L.]
Earl of Northbrook
Read 1a13 June (216); Read 2a20 June (880); Committee, Report, 21 June (1025)
*County Courts (Ireland) [H.L.]
Lord Ashbourne
Report 14 June (383); Read 3a18 June (686)
*Demise of the Crown
;
Read 1a11 June (9); Read 2a17 June (526); Committee, Report, 18 June (686)
Drunkards [H.L.]
Bishop of Winchester
Report 14 June (383); Read 3a20 June (874)
Education (Scotland)
;
Read 1a20 June (882)
*Isolation Hospitals
;
Read 1a18 June (686)
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
*Justices' Jurisdiction (London) [H.L.]
Lord Belper
Read 1a17 June (512); Read 2a25 June (1345)
Licensing [H.L.]
Bishop of Winchester
Report 14 June (383); Read 3a 20 June (877)
*Lunacy (Ireland) [H.L.]
Lord Ashbourne
Read 3a14 June (383)
Merchant Shipping Act 1894 Amendment [H.L.]
Lord Muskerry.
Second Reading (rejected) 17 June (512)
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies)
Lord Monkswell
Read 1a20 June (882); Read 2a25 June (1349)
*Prevention of Corruption (No. 2) [H.L.]
Earl of Halsbury
Committee, Report, 13 June (217)
*Purchase of Land (Ireland)
Earl of Denbigh
Read 1a14 June (384), Read 2a18 June (685); Committee, Report, 24 June (1185); Read 3a 25 June (1350)
*Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) [H.L.]
Earl of Halsbury
Read 2a20 June (880); Committee, Report, 24 June (1185)
(B.) HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
Alkali, &amp;c. Works Regulation [H.L.]
;
Read 1o11 June (70)
Beer
Mr. Purvis
Referred to Standing Committee 26 June (1521)
*Berwickshire County Town [H.L.]
Mr. A. Graham Murray
Committee 20 June (1020)
Bishopric of Southwark [H.L.]
Mr. Thornton
Read 1o19 June (815)
Canal Traffic
Mr. Holland
Read 1o25 June (1423)
*Civil List
Sir M. Hicks-Beach
Third Reading (Adjd.) 11 June (143); Read 3a18 June (736)
*Colonial Acts Confirmation
Sir Robert Finlay
Read 1o13 June (330)
*Consolidated Fund (No. 2)
Mr. J. W. Lowther
Read 1o26 June (1584)
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
*County Courts (Ireland) [H.L.]
Mr. Atkinson
Read 1o 21 June (1081)
Cremation [H.L.]
Sir W. Foster
Consideration, 19 June (859); 26 June (1549)
*Dublin Corporation
Mr. Wyndham
Second Rdg. (Adjd.) 17 June (676)
Education (Young Children's School Attendance) (Scotland)
Mr. Pirie
Consideration, 12 June (149); Read 3a19 June (815)
*Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment
Mr. Ritchie
Second Rdg. (Adjd.) 11 June (109); Read 2o17 June (629); Expenses (Com.) 21 June (1150); 25 June (1507); (Report) 26 June (1549)
*Factories and Workshop Acts Consolidation
Mr. Ritchie
Read 2o17 June (367)
*Finance
Mr. J. W. Lowther
Committee, 18 June (755); 20 June929; 24 June (1230); 25 June (1437)
Grocers' Licenses (Scotland)
Sir John Leng
Read 1o18 June (736)
*Isolation Hospitals
Mr. Long
Considered, Read 3o, 17 June (676)
*Marriages Legislation [H.L.]
Mr. Jesse Collings
Read 1o25 June (1422)
Meat Marking (Ireland)
Mr. Field
Read 1o17 June 680; Read 2o26 June (1584)
Medical Acts Amendment
Sir Richard Jebb
Read 1o18 June (736)
Members of Parliament (Resignation of Seats)
Mr. Loder
Withdrawn 26 June (1583)
Mines (Fight Hours)
Mr. Yoxall
Committee 12 June (176)
*National Gallery (Purchase of Adjacent Land)
Mr. Akers Douglas
Read 2o 17 June (676); Committee 25 June (1507); 26 June (1583)
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies)
Mr. Wingfield-Digby
Committee, Report, 13 June (376); Consideration 17 June (679); Read 3o19 June (847)
Public Libraries [H.L.]
Lord Balcarres
Read 2o24 June (1332)
*Purchase of Land (Ireland)
Mr. Wyndham
Committee, Report, 13 June (375)
Railway (Labour Disputes) Conciliation and Arbitration
Mr. Bell
Read 1o25 June (1422)
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
*Registration of Births and Deaths
Mr. Grant Lawson
Read 1o13 June (329); Second Heading (Adj); 17 June (678)
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children
Mr. Crombie
Referred to Standing Committee, 26 June (1512)
Small Holdings (Ireland)
Col. Nolan
Read 1o14 June (467)
*Solicitors [H.L.]
Sir R. Finlay
Read 1o21 June (1081)
Vaccination Prosecutions
Mr. Channing
Read 1o17 June (680)
*Youthful Offenders
Mr. Ritchie
Read 1o20 June (927); Read 2o24 June (1332)
APPENDIX II.
HOUSE OF COMMONS. SESSION 1901.
LIST OF RULES, ORDERS, &amp;C, which have been presented during the Session, and are required by Statute to lie for an appointed number of Days upon the Table of the House.
[Continuation of List given in preceding Volume.]
Title of Paper.
Date from which the Period runs.
Period to lie upon the Table.
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge Act, 1877 (Cambridge),;Copy of Statutes made by the Governing Body of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, under The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge Act, 1877, on 31st January 1901, and sealed on 21st February 1901, amending Statutes IV., IX., X., XIII., and XVII. of the Statutes of that College [40 and 41 Vic., c. 48, s. 50]
13 June
12 weeks
Board of Education,;Copy of Draft Order in Council for transferring to the Board of Education the powers of the Charity Commissioners to frame and establish Schemes for Educational Endowments in England and Wales [62 and 63 Vic, c. 33, s. 5]
18 June
4 weeks
Inebriates Acts, 1879 to 1899 (Regulations for State Inebriate Reformatories),;Copy of General Regulations for the Management and Discipline of State Inebriate Reformatories, made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department in pursuance of The Inebriates Act, 1898 [61 and 62 Vic, c. 60, s. 21]
24 June
4 weeks (whilst the House is sitting)
Public Records (Admiralty),;Copy of Eighth Schedule containing a List of Particulars of Classes of Documents which have been removed from the Office of the Commissioners for executing the office of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and deposited in the Public Record Office, but are not considered of sufficient public value to justify their preservation therein [40 and 41 Vic, c. 55, s. 1]
24 June
4 weeks
Prisons (England and Wales) (Visiting Committees),;Copy of Draft Rule proposed to be made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department under the Prisons Acts, 1877 and 1898, with respect to the constitution of the Visiting Committee of Borstal Prison [61 and 62 Vic, c. 41, s. 2 (2)]
26 June
30 days
Prisons (England and Wales) (Appropriation of Borstal Prison to Selected Criminal Prisoners), Copy of Draft Rule proposed to be made in pursuance of Section 25 of The Prisons Act, 1877, appropriating Borstal Prison to Selected Male Criminal Prisoners [61 and 62 Vic, c. 41, s. 2 (2)]
26 June
30 days
Prisons (England and Wales) (Rules for Prisoners between the ages of 16 and 21 years),;Copy of Draft of Special Rules proposed to be made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department under The Prisons Act, 1898, with regard to Prisoners between the ages of 16 and 21 years [61 and 62 Vic, c. 41, s. 2 (2)]
26 June
30 days
INDEX TO THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
[AUTHORISED EDITION].
SEVENTH VOLUME OF SESSION 1901.
JUNE 11;JUNE 26.
EXPLANATION OF ARRANGEMENT AND ABBREVIATIONS.
Bills: Read First, Second, or Third Time = 1R., 2R., 3R. [c.] = Commons. [l.]=Lords. Amendt. = Amendment. Os. = Observations. Qs. = Questions. As. = Answers. Com. = Committee. Con. = Consideration. Where in the Index * is added with Reading of a Bill, or a Vote in Committee of Supply, it indicates that no Debate tool place on that Stage of the Bill, or on that Vote. Subjects discussed in Committee of Supply are entered under their headings, and also under Members' Names, without reference to the actual Vote before the Committee.
A
Aberdeen
Aerated Water Manufacturers;Food and Drugs Act Prosecution
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Mr. Long, June 18, 714.
Abraham, Mr. William [Glamorganshire, Rhonda]
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 182.
Abraham, Mr. William [Cork Co., N.E.]
Belfast Riots;Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, June 14, 456.
Fermoy and Cork Direct Railway, Commencement of Construction, June 21, 1079.
Meat;Poisoned Tinned Meat at Fermanagh Barracks, June 17, 547.
United Irish League, Shanballymore;Police tearing down Notice of Meeting, alleged, June 20, 915.
Achill
Postal Arrangements, Sunday Delivery, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1219.
Adjournment of the House
Motions for Adjournment to discuss matter of Urgent Public Importance
Belfast Riot;Mr. J. Redmond's Motion, June 14, 433.
Gibraltar Harbour Works;Mr. G. Bowles's Motion, June 13, 301.
Refuge Camps in South Africa;Mr. Lloyd-George's Motion, June 17, 573.
Admiralty
First Lord;Earl of Selborne.
Secretary;Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster.
Civil Lord;Mr. E. G. Pretyman.
Documents of not sufficient public value to justify preservation;Schedule presented June 24, 1184, 1195
see also Navy.
Adulteration of Food and Drugs
Aberdeen Aerated Water Manufactures, see Aberdeen.
Prosecutions under Food and Drugs Act;Legislation assimilating working of Act to that of the Fertilizers' Act.
Qs. Mr. Crombie, Mr. Pirie; As. Mr. Long, June 18, 714.
Afforesting
Ireland, see that title.
Africa, East
Mombasa, Government Cargoes for; Charter of Vessels, Rate of Freight, etc.
Q. Col. Denny; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 13, 273.
Native Labour;Sir L. Matthew's Recommendations.
Q. Mr. J. A. Pease; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 24, 1204.
Zanzibar, see that title.
Africa, South
Cattle and Live Stock Farms, Establishment of, by the Government.
Q. Mr. Lambert A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 52.
Garrisoning with twelve Infantry Battalions after the War
Debate [Lords] June 25, 1370.
Natal, Cape Colony, etc., see those titles.
Transvaal, Orange River Colony, etc., see those titles.
War, see South African War.
Agricultural Districts
Meteorological Reports;Daily Publication at Sub Post Offices in Agricultural Districts
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 17, 560.
Agricultural Rates Act
Petitions, June 19, 814.
Agriculture, Board of
President;Rt. Hon. R. W. Hanbury.
Agricultural Instruction;Transfer of Powers from Board of Agriculture to Board of Education
Qs. Sir W. H. Dyke, Mr. W. Palmer; As. Mr. Hanbury, June 24, 1212.
Intelligence Division;Annual Report of Proceedings Presented, June 20, 886; June 21, 1025.
Ahinah
Labourers' Cottages;Rejection of J. Desmond's Application
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 427.
Aire and Calder Navigation Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 699.
Aldeburgh Corporation (Water) Bill
l. 1R.* June 11, 6.
2R.* June 24, 1174.
Aldershot Gas and Water Bill
l. 2R.* June 13, 213.
Alfreton Gas Bill
l. Commons Amendts.* June 11, 4.
Alien Immigration
Immigrants in London
Census Returns
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. W. Long, June 13, 280
Warning as to prospects of Pauper Aliens, Legislation, etc.
Qs. Mr. T. Dewar, Mr. J. Lowther; As. Visc. Cranborne, June 17, 552.
Statistics
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 24, 1208.
United States Restrictions
Contagious Diseases;Regulations excluding Aliens from United States, Simular Regulation for Great Britain, proposed
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Long, June 25, 1406.
Number of Aliens refused admission at American Ports, Number arriving at British Ports
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 24, 1209.
Alkali Works Regulation Bill
c. 1R.* June 11, 70.
Petitions, June 12, 146.
Alverstone, Lord;Lord Chief Justice
Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) Bill, 2R., June 20, 881.
Allan, Mr. W.
"Daring," H.M.S.;Boiler explosion, June 11, 58.
Finance Bill, com., June 24, 1293, June 25, 1473.
Trade, Board of;Salary of the President and the Senior Director of Railways, June 13, 339.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Expenditure on, Failure of Designs, etc., June 14, 484.
Ambrose, Dr. R. [Mayo, W.]
Achill Postal Arrangements, Sunday Delivery, etc., June 24, 1219.
Evictions;Number of Families evicted 1886&#x2013;1900, etc., June 20, 913.
Fisheries, Ireland;Commissioners, Appointment of Mr. Lane, June 17, 566.
Mallaranny;Prosecutions for Cattle Trespassing, etc., June 17, 567.
Mayo County Police Force;Number of Police 1895&#x2013;1900, etc., June 20, 912.
Westport Land Sales, Terms, etc., June 24, 1222.
Anatolian Railway
Papers relating to
Q. Lord E. Fitzmaurice; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 24, 1203.
Animals
Public Drinking Places;Providing with Stand-Pipe and Tap
Q. Mr. L. Sinclair; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 14, 423.
Appeals
House of Lords, see that title.
Imperial Court of Appeal, see that title.
Return;House of Lords and Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Appeals
Qs. Mr. Blake; As. Sir R. Finlay, June 20, 910; June 24, 1201.
Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) Bill, see that title.
Applecross
Fishery Industry;Erection of Pier at Annat proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 14, 425.
Apricots
Fruit Duty;Apricot Pulp, Canned Apricots, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 14, 417.
Arabi Pasha
see Egypt.
Archdale, Mr. E. M. [Fermanagh, N.]
Fermanagh Royal School Endowment;Students attending St. Macarten's Seminary, etc., June 13, 288.
Hickson, Mr.;Appointment as Resident Magistrate, June 18, 725.
Architects
Government Offices;Death of Architects, Arrangements for carrying out Designs
Q. Mr. Whitmore; A. Mr. A. Douglas, June 14, 426.
Ardrossan Gas and Water Order Confirmation Bill
c. Con.* June 11, 47.
3R.* June 13, 251.
l. 1R.* June 14, 380.
3R.* June 25, 1343.
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill
c. 2R. June 11, 41.
Referring Bill to Joint Com. of Lords and Commons, June 13, 230.
Con.* June 14, 402.
3R.* June 18, 697.
l. 1R.* June 20, 872.
Army
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. St. John Brodrick.
Under-Secretary;Lord Raglan.
Financial Secretary;Lord Stanley.
Africa, South, Garrisoning after the War, see Africa, South.
Ammunition
Mark IV. Bullets, see title Bullets.
Small Arm Ammunition, see that sub-heading.
Army Corps;Six Corps Organization
Constitution of
Q. Earl of Dunraven; A. Lord Raglan, June 13, 229.
Debate (Lords), June 25, 1370.
Barracks, see Names of Barracks.
Bullets, see that title.
Civil Disturbances, Employment, of Troops' see Penrhyn Quarry Dispute.
Clothing Department;Writers' Overtime Pay, Placing Writers on same Footing as Storehouse Men, etc.
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Lord Stanley, June 25, 1394.
Commissions;Number granted to Militia Officers since the Outbreak of War
Os. Duke of Bedford, Lord Raglan, June 25, 1361, 1383.
Conditions of Service;Terms offered to Recruits not sufficient to fulfil Requirements of the Reform and Reorganisation Proposals.
Debate (Lords), June 25, 1350.
Conscription;
References to in Debate on Reorganisation Proposals (Lords), June 25, 1351.
Contracts
Commission;Government Orders for Khaki Cloth, Wrench v. Langworthy, Bros. &amp; Co.
Qs. Maj. Rasch, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 895.
Fair Wage Resolution
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Lord Stanley, June 24, 1197.
Irish Firms
Barrack Stores, Purchasing at Woolwich;Complaints
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 548; Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 704.
Beer Contracts, Withdrawing from Irish Firms;Resolution of Irish Trades Congress
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 547.
Meat, see that sub-heading.
South African War, see that title;Army Contracts.
Deceased Soldiers' Estates;Case of J. Curtin
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 546.
Deserters, Treatment of;Hussars marched handcuffed through the Streets
Q. Mr. Galloway; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 267.
Food, Insufficient Food;
References to, in Debate on Government Reorganisation Proposals (Lords), June 25, 1352.
Garrison Regiments, Royal;Reserve Garrison Artillery, First Class;Continuous Working Furlough
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 705.
India, see that title.
Ireland, Recruiting in, see title Ireland.
Meat, Tinned Meats;Men of the York and Lancaster Regiment poisoned, etc.
Qs. Mr. P. Smith, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Lord Stanley, June 14, 412; Qs. Mr. W. Abraham, Capt. Donelan, Mr. Field; As. Lord Stanley, June 17, 547.
Medical Department;Director General, Appointment of
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 895.
Militia, see that title.
Non-Commissioned Officers' Pay, Pensions, etc.
Debate on Government Reorganisation Proposals (Lords), June 25, 1350.
Officers;Retired Colonels, Granting Rank of General, proposed
Q. Mr. Kimber; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 268.
Old Age Pensions for Reserve Battalions O. Duke of Bedford, June 25, 1359.
Ordnance Factories, Vote for, June 24, 1329.
Outfit Expenses;King's Royal Rifles, see that title.
Parents of Soldiers, Maintenance of, Soldiers' Liabilities;Case of C. Guilfoile
Q. Mr. Delany; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 893.
Pay;Iusufficient Pay and Allowances, Stoppages from Pay, etc.
Debate on Government Reorganisation Proposals (Lords), June 25, 1352.
Paymasters, see sub-heading Staff Paymasters.
Pensions for Non-commissioned Officers and Men
Debate on Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, June 25, 1355.
Recruits
Ireland;Number of Recruits for Regular and Militia Forces
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 415. Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 894.
Statistics;Monthly Return proposed
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 705.
Terms offered under Reorganisation Proposals;Insufficient to fulfil Requirements involved in the Proposals
Motion (Duke of Bedford), June 25, 1350.
Reform and Reorganisation Proposals
Army Corps, see that sub-heading.
Staff, Establishment of;Number and Estimated Cost, Return proposed
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 892.
Wolseley, Lord, and Mr. Cardwell's Scheme of 1870
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Mr. Brodrick June 17, 546.
Remount Department Administration;Appointing none but Officers of the Veterinary Department proposed
O. Capt. Norton, June 21, 1056.
Remounts, see title Horses.
Reserve
Families of Reservists, Provision for, Separation Allowance, etc.
Debate on Government Reorganisation Proposals, June 25, 1357.
Government Proposals for Reorganisation of the Army
Debate (Lords), June 25, 1350.
Reservists returned home from South' Africa;Detention at Aldershot
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 892.
Rifles, see that title.
Separation Allowances, see sub-heading Reserve; also title Militia.
Small Arms Ammunition, Reserve of;Calling in Yeomanry Reserve, etc.
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 53.
Staff Paymasters;Increase in Pay, proposed
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Lord. Stanley, June 24, 1198.
Volunteers, see that title.
War Office, see that title.
Yeomanry, see that title.
Army Estimates
Ordnance Factories;;345,000, Rep., June 24, 1329.
Arnold-Forster, Mr. H. O.;Secretary to the Admiralty (Belfast, W.)
Arran, Island of;Proposed Signal Station, June 20, 898.
Boilers;Water-tube Boilers, Ships to be reboilered with new type of Boiler, June 14, 470, 477; June 25, 1397.
"Cumberland," H.M.S., Progress in Construction, etc., June 25, 1397.
"Daring," H.M.S.;Boiler Explosion, June 11, 57.
Dockyards, Increase of Wages for Work, men at Deptford;Position of Shipwrights, Recorders of Work, Machinists, Spinners, etc., June 14, 467, 475.
"Euryalus," H.M.S., Fire on, June 11, 58.
Foreign Stations;Distribution of Staff on Shore on different Stations, June 14, 476.
Haulbowline Dockyard, Dry Docks;Construction of Second Dock, proposed, June 17, 550, 557.
Meat Contracts
Channel Squadron at Berehaven;Foreign Meat Supplies, June 20, 897.
Navy in Ireland;Fresh Meat Contracts, June 24, 1199.
Mediterranean Fleet, Lord Charles Beresford's letter, June 24, 1200.
"Mongolian," Transport to South Africa, Discharge of, June 14 412.
Navy Estimates, Procedure;Discussion on Shipbuilding Vote, etc., June 14, 507.
Prize Money, Balance remaining unpaid, etc., June 17, 549.
Religious Ministrations for Dying Seamen;Case on H.M.S. "Diadem," June 20, 896; June 24, 1199.
"Repulse," H.M.S., Fatality in Lough Swilly;Testing Fittings at Chatham, June 20, 898.
Shipbuilding, Amount spent on New Construction in 1900, June 14, 416.
Stokers, Inadequate number of, June 21, 1059.
"Sybille," H.M.S., Wreck of;Composition of Force afloat and ashore, June 20, 896.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Designer of Superintending the Building of other Vessels, etc., June 25, 1395.
Expenditure on;Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 486, 501, 502.
Victualling;Report of Vice-Admiral Rice's Committee, June 11, 57.
Whale Island Bandsmen;Army Pensioner's Allowance, June 21, 1059.
Arran, Island of
Signal Station, proposed
Q. Mr. Morris; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 898.
Art Galleries
Scotland;Expenditure, Loan Collection from South Kensington, Purchase of Pictures, etc.
Debate on Com. of Supply, June 21, 1106.
(For particular Galleries, see their Names.)
Arterial Drainage
see Drainage.
Asia Minor
Anatolian Railway, see that title.
Turkish Tariff Charges;Proposed Increase
Q. Mr. J. O'Kelly; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 24, 1203.
Asiatic Labour
Queensland, see that title.
Aspatria, Silloth and District Water Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
l. Commons Amendts.* June 25, 1336.
Asquith, Rt. Hon. H. H. [Fife, E.]
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con. June 12, 166, 175.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 629, 634
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1458.
Naval Works Bill;Date of Introduction, June 14, 416.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. J., Attorney-General for Ireland [Londonderry].
Belfast:
Disturbances;Mr. Trew's Speeches, laying on the Table, proposed, June 17, 570.
Valuation for Rating Purposes;Complications arising out of King's Bench Decision, June 25, 1419.
Dublin, Allocation of Police Court Fines, in 1899, June 20, 923.
Fitzgerald Estate, Receiver Sueing for Hanging Gale, June 20, 922.
Killarney Quarter Sessions;White Glove Calendar, Absence of Sheriff, etc., June 20, 922.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 4) (Ireland) Bill, 2R. June 11, 39.
Malicious Burning
Loughrea Case;Application for compensation, etc., June 24, 1226.
Sligo;Crown Proceedings, June 24, 1225.
Moystown Arson Case;Holding Special Court, alleged, June 13, 292.
O'Reilly, Sergeant, action of;Extracting Information from M. Dolan's son, June 13, 291.
Tullamore Quarter Sessions, Crown v. Peterson;laying Copy of Order made by Judge on the Table, June 17, 569.
Attorney-General
Sir R. Finlay.
Attorney-General for Ireland
Rt. Hon J. Atkinson.
Auction Clause
see Private Bills.
Australasia
King's Declaration against Roman Catholicism, Federal Cabinet in favour of Revision, alleged
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 18 (95), 707.
Queensland, see that title.
Avoch Harbour
Repair of
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 13, 284.
Ayr County Buildings Provisional Order Confirmation Bill
l. 2R.* June 20, 872.
B
Babcock and Wilcox Boilers
see Navy;Boilers.
Baden-Powell's Police
see South African Constabulary.
Bagot, Maj. J. F. [Westmoreland, Kendal]
Coal Mines Explosives;Adding to Special List, Order in Council, Delays, etc., June 13, 274.
Balcarres, Lord [Lancashire, Chorley]
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill, 2R., June 14, 386.
Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1041.
National Gallery;Protection from Fire, June 17, 564.
Balfour, Maj. Kenneth [Christchurch]
Mall, Alteration of;Exhibiting proposed Designs, June 18, 721.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J.;First Lord of the Treasury [Manchester, W.]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons proposed, June 13, 243.
Beer Bill Deputation and the Procedure with reference to the Bill, June 24, 1229.
Business of the House
Barrow Drainage Question, June 11, 100.
Course of Business;Replies to Questions, etc., June 11, 69; June 13, 300, 301; June 14, 430; June 18, 734; June 24, 1227; June 25, 1421.
Government Business;Statement and Motion, June 11, 70, 90, 92.
Civil List Bill, 3R., June 18, 748.
Commerce, Minister of, Appointment proposed, June 18, 732.
Education;Higher Elementary Education, Cockerton Judgment, Arrangement for Winter Session 1901&#x2013;2;Surcharges by Auditors, etc., June 18, 730, 731.
Expiring Laws Continuance Bill;Ballot Act, etc., Permanent Statutes proposed, June 14, 429.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 11, 139; June 17, 667.
Finance Business of the House
Consolidated Fond Bill;Resolution in Com. of Ways and Means, Procedure, June 25, 1432.
Supply
Time taken up by discussing matters of secondary importance, etc., June 14, 507.
Votes, Order of Taking;Financial Necessities of the Administration, etc., June 24, 1227, 1228, 1229.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme
Purchase of Spanish Territory, proposed, June 17, 554.
Report of Committee, Laving on the Table, June 17, 553; June 20, 900, 901.
Rawson's, Adm. Letters, Laying on the Table, etc., June 25, 1420.
Suspension of Works on Western side of the Rock, etc., June 13, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 318.
Ireland
Reformatories;Committals, Legislation, proposed, June 18, 726.
University Education, Royal Commission
Names of Members and Terms of Reference June 13, 298; June 20, 925.
Place of Sittings, etc., June 21, 1080.
Printing Evidence in Ireland, June 25, 1421.
Military Loans Bill, Date of Introduction, June 13, 299.
Modern Languages and Public Service Examinations;Appointment of Committee, June 11, 69.
Naval Works Bill;Date of Introduction, June 14, 415, 416.
Old Age Pensions Schemes
France;Laying Copy of the Labour Pensions Bill on the Table of the House, June 18, 731.
Hearts of Oak Benefit Society;Resolution, June 20, 926.
Roman Catholicism, Royal Declaration against;Declaration of Heads of States of Germany, France, etc., June 13, 299.
South African War;Position of Affairs, June 13, 259.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht, Failure of Design, Responsibility for, June 14, 495.
War Office Reorganisation Committee;Opportunity for Discussing, June 13, 300.
Workmen's Compensation Act, Amendment proposed;Irish Traders' Congress Resolution, June 24, 1226.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. G. W.;President of the Board of Trade [Leeds, Central]
Alien Immigration
Statistics of Immigrants into United Kingdom in 1901, June 24, 1209.
United States Restrictions;Number refused admission at American Ports, number arriving at British Ports, June 24, 1210
Boyle, Sir C., Death of, June 13, 371.
Coal
Exports from Cardiff and Newport in May, 1900 and 1901, June 14, 422.
Discrepancy in Figures, June 25, 1403
Trade Statistics;Return, June 25, 1402.
Commercial Intelligence Committee, Constitution and Terms of Reference, etc., June 21, 1063.
Gambling in Grain, Prevention of;Co-operation with Germany, proposed, June 17, 558.
Ireland
Ballintogher Railway Station;Erection of Passenger and Goods Station, proposed, June 17, 572.
Maiden Lights, Improvement of, etc., June 20, 924.
Iron Ore;Amount imported into South Wales in 1900, etc., June 13, 278.
Light Railways Act, 1896;Free Advances, Amount remaining available, etc., June 13, 277.
Mercantile Marine Officers' Certificates;Foreign Officers on British Ships, June 21, 1062.
"Primrose Hill," Loss of, June 13, 372.
Railways
Accidents;Prevention of Accidents Rules, 1901
Notification of;Proposed Standard Brake, June 17, 559, 560.
Automatic Couplings;Rates for Cycles, etc., June 13, 371.
Cycles;Conveyance by Railways;Light Railway Bill, June 13, 277.
Third Class Season Tickets, Issue of Proposed, June 25, 1403.
Workmen's Trains;Inadequate Facilities, June 13, 341.
Sea Fisheries;Committee of Inquiry, Appointment, June 21, 1062.
Seamen
Able-bodied Seamen and the Manning of Merchant Ships, Proof of Service, Loss of the "Primrose Hill," etc., June 13, 348, 349.
Food Supply
"Manchester Corporation," Case of, June 24, 1211.
"South Esk," Provisions on;Complaints of Crew, etc., June 25, 1400.
Lascars on P. &amp; O. Steamers, Accommodation, etc.;Mr. Justice Matthew's Judgment, June 24, 1212
Number, Ages and Ratings;Return June 21, 1061
Undermanning of Ships, etc., June 13, 372
South-Eastern and London, Chatham and' Dover Railway Bill, 2R. June 11, 32
Tonnage Dues;Measurement of Ships, etc. June 17, 559; June 20, 905; June 25, 1402.
Balfour of Burleigh, Lord;Secretary for Scotland.
Glasgow Corporation (Police) Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, 2R. June 25, 1342.
Ballinfull
Post Office, Establishment of, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Ballintogher
Postal Arrangements;Increasing Facilities, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 17, 572.
Railway Station;Erection of Passenger and Goods Station, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 17, 571.
Ballyvaughan
Fishing Industry;Assisting Fishermen, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 564.
Baltimore
Postal Delivery, Improvement of
Qs. Mr. Gilhooly; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 68; June 24, 1220.
Banbury, Mr. F. G. [Camberwell, Peckham]
Beer Bill, com. June 26, 1532, 1534.
Cremation Bill, con. June 19, 862, 863; June 26, 1551, 1579.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R. June 19, 839.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, com. June 12, 189, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R. June 19, 849, 850, 854.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill, 3R. June 11, 12.
Barbour, Sir D.
Financial Condition of Annexed South African Republics, see Transvaal.
Barra, Island of
Crofters and Cottars;Purchase of Land from Lady Gordon-Cathcart, Disturbances arising out of the Application for
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1141.
Barracks
for particular Barracks see their Names.
Barrington, Viscount
Representative Peer for Ireland, June 11, 1; June 17, 509; June 20, 869.
Barrow Drainage Question.
Facilities for Discussion
Os. Mr. Delany, Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 99, 100.
Barrow-in-Furness Corporation Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. 1R. * June 13, 255.
2R.* June 24, 1190.
Barry, Mr. E. [Cork County, S.]
Reeves' Estate, Skibbereen, Sale of Tenant Right, June 24, 1224.
Barry Railway Bill
c. Report*, June 18, 698.
con.* June 25, 1387.
Bartley, Mr. G. C. T. [Islington, N.]
Finance Bill, Com. June 24, 1257.
Bawnboy
Rural District, Congestion in;Scheduling as Congested Districts
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 918.
Union Hospital Trained Nurse, Salary;Recoupment out of the Local Taxation Account
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1417.
Bayley, Mr. T. [Derbyshire, Chesterfield.]
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R. June 19, 853.
Transvaal Natives;Use of Lash, Control of Native Labour, etc., June 18, 702.
Zanzibar, Slavery in;Procuring Native Labour from British East Africa, Sir W. Matthew's Suggestion, etc., June 18, 707.
Beach, Rt. Hon. Sir M. Hicks;Chancellor of the Exchequer [Bristol, W.]
Bonded Warehouses;Fortifying Wine, Age and Quality of Spirits used, June 20, 903.
Civil List Bill, 3R. June 18, 738, 748, 749.
Coal, Export Duty, etc.
Customs House Rules;Coal sold Free on Board at British Port, etc., June 18, 712.
Exemption of Contracts entered into before Budget Statement, etc., June 20, 902; June 21, 1061; June 25, 1396, 1398.
Gibraltar, Exemption of, proposed, June 24, 1206.
Investigation into Coal Question, June 20, 902; June 24, 1206; June 25, 1399.
Italian Contracts, Effect on, June 20, 901.
Small Coal;Proposed Reduction of Duty, June 10, 713.
Consolidated Fund Bills, Resolution in Com. of Ways and Means;Raising question of Conduct of the War in South Africa, June 25 (95), 1426.
Customs Duties;Rebates in the Isle of Man, Proposed Rebate for Ireland, June 14, 419.
Finance Bill, Com. (Tea), June 18, 759, 760, 762, 769, 777, 786; (Sugar), June 18, 786, 789, 792, 797, 798, 805,806; June 20, 929, 933, 935, 939, 948, 972, 976, 983,987, 992, 993, 1005, 1008, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1017, 1019; June 24, 1237, 1260, 1261; (Coal), June 24, 1271, 1278, 1280, 1287, 1288, 1294, 1300, 1306, 1307, 1313; June 25, 1440, 1448, 1450, 1452, 1453, 1454, 1456, 1457, 1461, 1466, 1480, 1487, 1489, 1490, 1492, 1495, 1496, 1497, 1498, 1501, 1507.
Fruit Duty;Apricot Pulp, Canned Apricots, etc., June 14, 417.
Income Tax
British Investments Abroad;Amount of Income Tax charged, June 13, 272.
Crown, Payment by, June 18, 713.
Exemption of, Fines on Demise of Land, etc., June 17, 555.
South African War;Expenditure, Ways and Means, etc.;Carrying on War without appealing to Parliament for Sanction of Further Expenditure, June 25, 1392.
Sugar Duty;Molasses for Cattle Feeding;Refunding Extra Duty, proposed, June 17, 555.
Wine in Royal Cellars, Sale of Wine from, Payment of Duty, June 21, 1060.
Bean, J.
Case of, see Brechin.
Bedford, Duke of
Army Reform and Reorganisation, Government Proposals;Inadequate Terms offered to Recruits, etc., June 25, 1350.
Bee-keeping
Scotland;Congested Districts Board Administration Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1133.
Beer
Beer Rations on Transports, see Transport Service.
Contracts for Troops in Ireland, Withdrawing from Irish Firms;Resolution of Irish Trades Congress
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 547.
Beer Bill
c. Com., June 26, 1521.
Beer Bill
Deputation to Mr. Balfour;Sending the Bill to Grand Committee, etc.
Q. Mr. Chaplin; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 24, 1229.
Facilities for passing
Statement (Mr. A. J. Balfour), June 11, 75.
Petitions, June 13, 256; June 24, 1193.
Beira
Trade Report presented, June 13, 215.
Belfast
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Equipment
Q. Mr. J. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1223.
Revaluation Appeals;Assimilating Irish System to that of England, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 727; Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 25, 1419.
Riots
Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, Motion (Mr. J. Redmond), June 14, 433.
Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 430, 431, 432, 433.
Incitement to;Speeches delivered by Trew
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1076.
Laying Speeches on the Table, proposed
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 17, 570.
Shipbuilding yards;Police Patrolling yards, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 732.
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill
c. 2R., June 18 (95), 688.
Belfast Harbour Bill
l. Report,* June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1335.
Belleville Boilers
see Navy;Boilers, Watertube Boilers.
Belper, Lord
Justices' Jurisdiction (London) Bill, 2R., June 25, 1345.
Bengal
Railway;Inadequacy of the Culverts, Mr. Lyall's Report, Inadequacy of Waterways provided during Construction of Railways, etc.
Os. Lord Stanley of Alderley, June 13, 229; Earl of Hardwicke, 227, 229.
Beresford, Lord Charles
Mediterranean Fleet;Letter
Qs. Mr. Norman, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 24, 1200.
Bermondsey
Housing of the Working Classes;South-Eastern and L. C. and D. Railway Co.
O. Mr. Hay, June 11, 26.
Berwickshire County Town Bill
c. Com.* June 20, 1020.
Bethlem Hospital Bill
c. 2R., June 17, 534.
Bexley Tramways Bill
l. 2R.* June 13, 213.
Bhownaggree, Sir M. M. [Bethnal Green, N.E.]
Milk Standard, Fixing;Report of Departmental Committee, June 14, 422.
Bideford and Clovelly Railway (Abandonment) Bill
c. Report,* June 20, 884.
Con.* June 24, 1190.
Biggleswade Water Board Bill
c. Report,* June 26, 1585.
Bill, Mr. C. [Staffordshire, Leek]
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con., June 17, 531.
Bills
Procedure as to Private Bills, etc., see Private Bills.
Bingley Urban District Council Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Birkenhead Licensing Case
Executrix of deceased Publican not
licensed Person;Casus omissus in Licensing Act
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Mr. Ritchie June 24, 1208.
Birmingham
Infants' Bodies discovered in Undertaker's Cellar;Legislation as to Disposal of deceased Infants' Bodies
Q. Sir J. Kennaway; A. Mr. Long, June 11, 60.
National Democratic League;Chief Constable prohibiting Meeting
Qs. Mr. Lloyd-George, Mr. Labouchere, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Ritchie, June 25, 1404.
Underground Electric Cable from London;Results of Working, etc.
Q. Mr. Th. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 283.
Birmingham (City) Tramways Bill
c. 2R.* June 14, 401.
Bishopric of Southwark Bill
l. Com., June 11, 7.
Report,* June 13, 217.
3R., June 17, 524.
c. 1R.* June 19, 815.
Black, Mr. A. W. (Banffshire)
South African Constabulary;Service outside Transvaal, etc. Force available, etc., June 18, 703.
South African War
Boer Forces, Strength of, June 20, 889.
Boer Prisoners;Condition of Repatriation, June 13, 259.
Transvaal and Orange River Colony;Constitution of Legislative Councils, etc., June 11, 56.
Blackburn Corporation Bill
c. Con.* June 14, 401.
3R.* June 18, 696.
l. 1R.* June 20, 871.
2R.* June 25, 1335.
Blackie, Messrs.
Government Contractors;Evasion of Fair Wages Resolution, complaints from Dublin Bookbinders' Society
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 293.
Blackpool Improvement Bill
c. 3R.* June 11, 46.
l. 1R.* June 11, 6.
2R.* June 20, 870.
Blake, Mr. E. (Longford, S.)
Appeals, Return;House of Lords and Judicial Committee of the Privy Council Appeals, June 24, 1201.
Arizona Copper Company, Limited, Order Confirmation Bill
Joint Committee of Lords and Commons, proposed, June 13, 244.
Finance Bill, Com. June 20, 946.
House of Lords and Privy Council Appeals;Number of Sittings in 1899 and 1900, June 20, 910.
Blundell, Col. H. B. H. [Lancashire, Ince]
Finance Bill, Com. June 24, 1311; June 25, 1471.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill; Com. June 12, 188.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R. June 19, 854.
Boilers
Naval Ships, see Navy;Boilers.
Boland, Mr. J. [Kerry, S.]
Cahirciveen Mail Service to Waterville, Improvement of, June 18, 729.
Kenmare River Lights;Erection of light on Sherky Island, proposed, June 13, 288.
Mackerel Fishing Industry, Ireland;Opening Test Markets Abroad, etc., June 20, 911.
National Library, Ireland;Offer of American Patent Specifications, Completing East Wing, etc., June 13, 287.
Bolton
Postmen's Grievances
Q. Mr. Harwood; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1407.
Bolton Corporation Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. 1R.* June 13, 255.
2R.* June 24, 1190.
Instruction to Committee;Motion (Mr. Strachey), June 24, 1190.
Bond, Mr. E. [Nottingham, E.]
Education, Board of, and Technological Work;Report of Committee, June 13, 278.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com. June 12, 186.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Rill, 2R. June 19, 851.
Teachers, Registration of, June 21, 1070.
Bonded Warehouses
Fortifying Wine;Rule as to Age and. Quality of Spirits, use of, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 20, 903.
Borough Funds Act Amendment Bill
Petitions, June 11, 48; June 18, 699.
Borstal Prison
Appropriation of, to selected Criminal Prisoners;Draft Rule Presented, June 26, 1510.
Boscawen, Mr. Griffith;Parliamentary Charity Commissioner [Kent, Tunbridge]
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill;Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1044
Cremation Bill, Con. June 26, 1559, 1578.
St. Bartholomew's Hospital Bill, 2R. June 24, 1188.
St. George, Botolph Lane, Parish of;Payment of Curate by Charity Commissioners, June 21, 1066.
Bournemouth Corporation Bill
Instruction to Committee;Withdrawal of Motion, June 14, 387.
Petition, June 17, 536.
Report from Chairman of Ways and Means, June 14, 402.
Bowes, Lord
Took the Oath, June 14, 377.
Bowles, Mr. Gibson [Lynn Regis]
Consolidated Fund Bills, Resolutions in Com. of Ways and Means;Raising Question of the Conduct of the War in South Africa, June 25, 1424, 1425, 1427.
"Daring," H.M.S.;Boiler Explosion, June 11, 58.
Finance Bill, Com. June 24, 1299.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme.
Rawson's, Vice-Admiral, Letters, laying on the Table with Report of Committee, June 25, 1419.
Reports of Committee, laying on the Table, June 20, 900.
Suspension of Works on the Western Side of the Rock, etc., June 13, 301, 303, 304, 305.
Mediterranean Defences, June 24, 1200.
Boy Sailors' Scheme
see Seamen.
Boycotting, Ireland
Sligo, County;Case of Mr. Phibbs
Q. Col. M'Calmont; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 920.
Qs. Mr. O'Dowd, Mr. Dillon, Mr. M'Calmont; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1414.
Boyle, Sir C.
Death of;Services to the Board of Trade, Tribute
Os. Mr. Bryce, Mr. G. Balfour, June 13, 370, 371.
Bracklinn
National School Teacher;Salary, Payment for teaching Irish, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 293.
Bradford Corporation Bill
c. 3R.* June 11, 46.
l. 1R.* June 11, 6.
2R.* June 20, 870.
Bradshaw, Rev. Kevin
Assault on, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Johnston; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1078.
Brechin Labour Dispute
Bean, J., Case of;Proposed Remission of Sentence
Q. Mr. K. Hardie; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 13, 285.
Q. Mr. E. Robertson; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 21, 1071.
Brewers
Weights and Measures of goods sent to Customers, Inspection of, proposed
O. Mr. Broadhurst, June 13, 337.
Bridewell Hospital Bill
c. 2R.* June 17, 936.
Brigg, Mr. J. [York, W. R., Keighley]
Workmen's Trains;Inadequate Facilities, June 13, 336.
Brighton Corporation Bill
c. Con. June 17, 530.
3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 871.
Bristol Corporation Cemetery Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. 1R.* June 13, 255.
2R.* June 24, 1191.
Bristol Corporation (Docks and Railways etc.) Bill
l. Report from Select Com. June 14, 377.
3R.* June 20, 871.
c. 1R.* June 21, 1050.
British Gas Light Company Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Report,* June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1336.
Broadhurst, Mr. H. [Leicester]
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 798; June 20, 973, 975.
Workmen's Trains;Inadequate Facilities, June 13, 337.
Broadstairs and St. Peter's Water and Improvement Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. W. St. John;Secretary of State for War [Surrey, Guildford]
Contracts and Commissions;Wrench v. Langworthy Bros. &amp; Co., June 20, 895.
Deserters, Treatment of;Hussars marched handcuffed through the Streets, June 13, 267.
Flogging Soldier on board Transport Ship;Inquiry, Censure of Officer, etc., June 25, 1393.
Horses;Glasgow Tram Horses, Purchase of, June 21, 1056.
India;Number of Time-expired Men awaiting Reliefs, June 25, 1394.
Medical Department, Appointment of Director-General, June 20, 895.
Militia
Disembodiment of Battalions serving at home, June 21, 1058.
Guernsey Militia;Reorganisation, June 11, 55.
Officers;Retired Colonels, Granting Rank of General proposed, June 13, 268.
Pembroke Barracks;Conveying Drainage to Milford Haven, etc., June 13, 269.
Recruits;Ireland, Number of Enlistments in the Army and Militia, 1896&#x2013;98, June 20, 894.
Reform Schemes
Staff, Establishment of;Number and estimated Cost, Return proposed, June 20, 892.
Wolseley, Lord, and Mr. Cardwell's Scheme of 1870, June 17, 546.
Rifles, Automatic Rifles, Issue of, June 20, 893.
Small Arras Ammunition Reserve;Calling in Yeomanry Reserve, June 11, 54.
Soldiers, Maintenance of Parents;Case of C. Guilfoile, June 20, 893.
South African Stock Farms, Establishment of by the Government, June 11, 53.
South African War
Army Contracts in South Africa;Amounts paid and payable, June 21, 1056.
Beyer's, Gen. Commando, alleged surprise;Telegram of Inquiry stopped by Censor, etc., June 18, 701.
Boer Forces, Strength of, June 20, 889.
Armed Boers in Cape Colony;Number, June 25, 1392.
Boer Women and Children, Provision for;Negotiations with Boer Leaders respecting, June 21, 1055.
Carrington, Gen. Sir F.;Appointment to Command, Selection by War Office, etc., June 17, 544.
Civil Medical Officers;Releasing from Active Service, June 11, 52.
Cost of the War;Weekly Cost, June 25, 1392.
Court-Martial Sentences, Revision of, etc., June 20, 890.
Farm Burning
Roberts's, Lord, Reports and Correspondence with General Botha, June 11, 52.
Rundle, Gen., Action of;Blowing up Mills, etc., June 13, 262.
Horse Transport
"Cervona," Horses thrown overboard, etc., June 21, 1056.
Statistics, etc., June 13, 264.
Invalided Soldiers, Treatment of;Examination of Patients by Medical Boards, etc., June 20, 890.
Natives, Protection of;Compensation for Loss of Cattle, etc., June 14, 410.
Paarl District;Suppression of Newspapers, etc., alleged, June 13, 265.
Prinsloo's, Gen., Force, Surrender of;Detaining as Prisoners of War, June 18, 702.
Refuge Camps
Bloemfontein, Health of Children at;Medical Officer's Report, June 21, 1055.
Children, Total Number of;School Accommodation, etc., June 21, 1053.
Condition of Camps;Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality among, etc., June 17, 590, June 20, 887.
Instruction of Children, Compulsory Detention, etc., June 21, 1053.
Johannesburg, Mortality at, June 13, 264.
Ministers of Religion, Permission to visit, June 24, 1196.
Number and Situation of;Mortality Statistics, etc., June 17, 540.
Overcrowding;Proposed new Camps, etc., June 18, 701.
Permission to leave Camps, June 21, 1053, 1054.
Reservists returned home;Detention at Aldershot, June 20, 892.
Shooting of Burghers at Pretoria;Breach of Oath of Neutrality, June 14, 408, 409.
Supplies of Remounts and Mounted Men, June 25, 1434.
Typhoid Fever;Deathsamong Troops, number of Cases, etc., June 25, 1393.
Vlakfontien Engagement;Strength of British and Boer Forces, June 14, 410.
Volunteers:
London Scottish Volunteers, Conditions of Enlistment, Furlough and Pay, June 14, 411.
Mounted Infantry, Members serving as;Kate of Pay, June 13, 268.
Waterkloof and Colesberg Actions June 25, 1392.
Yeomanry, Imperial;Inducing men to join Yeomanry Regiments at home, June 11, 54.
Zulu Cattle Raiding under British Military Authority, alleged, June 13, 266, 267.
Volunteers
Ammunition
Kynoch's, Messrs. Offer, June 21, 1058.
Supplying Volunteers with gratuitous Ammunition, etc., June 13, 268.
Welsh Fusiliers, Royal;Want of Arms and Equipment, June 20, 894, 895.
War Office
Decentralisation Committee of 1898 Recommendations, June 17, 545.
Organisation;Report of Committee, Delay in Publication, June 11, 53.
Yeomanry, Imperial;New Regiments, Allocation of certain Regiments to Ireland, Suggestion, June 25, 1393.
Brunner, Sir J. [Cheshire, Northwich.]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 673.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 391.
Provisional Order Bills, Titles of Bills;Insufficient Identification, June 14, 388.
Bryce, Rt. Hon. J. [Aberdeen, S.]
Boyle, Sir C., Death of, June 13, 370.
Education, Scotland;Training Colleges, Mr. Carnegie's Gift, etc., June 20, 1082.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 950.
Railways, Automatic Couplings;Rates for Cycles, etc., June 13, 370.
Seamen;Undermanning of ships, etc., June 13, 368.
South African War;Zulu Cattle Raiding under British Military Authority, alleged, June 13, 267.
Buckingham Palace
Structural Alterations and Drainage Works;Supplementary Estimate
Q. Mr. Whitmore; A. Mr. A. Douglas, June 18, 721.
Buckland Fish Collection
Grimsby, Transference to, proposed.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 909.
Bucks Volunteers
African Detachment returned Home;Thirty Days' Furlough with Pay
Q. Mr. Carlile, A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 545.
Budget
Finance Bill, see that title, also titles Coal, Sugar Duties, etc.
Buenos Ayres
Parcels Post;Stamp Duty on Parcels, Right of imposing Fiscal Charge
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1215.
Bullard, Sir Harry [Norwich]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1520.
Bullets
Mark IV. Bullets;Number of Expanding Bullets manufactured for War Office, Withdrawal, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, June 25, 1394.
Burgess Hill Water Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 25, 1335.
Burgh Auditors
Scotland;Powers of the Secretary for Scotland to appoint
Q. Col. Denny; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 11, 65.
Burial Grounds
Maraig Burial Ground;Overcrowding, etc. Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray,. June 11, 64.
Burial Places Exemption from Rates (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 48; June 12, 146 June 25, 1389.
Burns, Mr. J. [Battersea]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 645, 649.
National Gallery (Purchase of Adjacent Land) Bill, 2R., June 17, 676.
Seamen and the Manning of Merchant Ships;Crimping in American Ports, Seamen's Grievances as to Food, etc., June 13, 355.
South Eastern and London, Chatham, and Dover Railway Bill, 2R., June 11, 29.
Burton-upon-Trent Corporation Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Bury Corporation Bill
l. 1R.* June 11, 6.
2R.* June 20, 870.
Bury Corporation Tramways Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. Lords Amendts. considered,* June 18, 696.
Business of the House
Course of Business;Mr. Balfour's Replies to Questions, etc., June 11, 69; June 13, 300; June 14, 430; June 18, 734; June 21, 1080; June 24, 1227; June 25, 1422.
Devolution Necessity for;"Hopeless Block of the Business of the Country," etc.
Os. Mr. J. Redmond, June 11, 85; Mr. J. Ellis, 92.
Government Business, Precedence on Tuesdays and Wednesdays for the rest of the Session, etc.
Statement and Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), June 11, 70.
Butter
Ireland, Prices in, Statistics for 1900;Prices of Creamery, Butter, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 289.
Standard of Water, Fixing;Case of J. Simons, Appointment of Committee, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 17, 561.
Buxton, Mr. Sydney [Tower Hamlets, Poplar]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 661.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 790; June 20, 973; June 24, 1242
Maltese Language Question, Laying Papers on the Table, June 25, 1400.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill, 3R., June 11, 16.
C
Cahirciveen
Mail Service to Waterville, Improvement of
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Caine, Mr. W. S. [Cornwall, Cranborne.]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 11, 46.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 764.
Mexico;Mr. R. Emett, English Mine Manager, Murder of, June 18, 711.
Walsall;Watch Committee and Licensing Prosecutions, Constable consulting Town Clerk before taking out Summonses, June 18, 714.
Calcutta, Bishop of
Status;Conferring Style and Precedence of Archbishop proposed
Q. Mr. H. D. Greene; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 13, 271.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 20, 898.
Caldwell, Mr. J. [Lanark, Mid.]
Art Galleries of Scotland, Expenditure on, etc., June 21, 1106.
Civil List Bill, 3R., June 11, 143; June 18, 736, 749.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 157, 3R., June 19, 829.
Education, Scotland;Training Colleges, etc., June 21, 1095.
Caledonian Railway Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 25, 1335.
2R.* June 11, 3.
Cambrian Railways Bill
l. 2R.* June 20, 870.
Camp, County Kerry
United Irish League;Constable taking Names of Enrolling Members
Qs. Mr. T. O'Donnell, Capt. Donelan; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 292.
Campbell, Mr. J. [Armagh, S.]
Civil Servants, Medical Inspection of Candidates;Fees, June 20, 905.
Clones Post Office;Free Medical Attendance for Officials, June 20, 923.
Lilly white, C, Wrongful Arrest on charge of Murder;Compensation Question, June 25, 1404.
Campbell, Rt. Hon. J. A. [Glasgow and Aberdeen Universities]
Education, Scotland;Training Colleges, etc., June 21, 1094.
Campbell-Bannerman, Rt. Hon. Sir H. [Stirling Burghs]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill, June 11, 44.
, Business of the House;Government Business, Taking over Private Members' Bills by the Government, Appropriating Private Members' Time, etc., June 11, 77.
Finance Bill. Com., June 20, 1009, 1013, 1014; June 24, 1257, 1261; June 25, 1481, 1505.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1515, 1516, 1517.
South African War
Position of Affairs, June 13, 258.
Refuge Camps, Condition of Camps, Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality among, June 17, 597.
Ways and Means, Procedure in Committee;Taking Consolidated Fund Resolutions, June 25, 1428.
Camperdown, Earl of
Licensing Bill, 3R., June 20, 878, 879.
Canada
British Literature, Canadian Tariffs on;Proposed Reduction of Postal Rate
Q. Mr. Trevelyan; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 715.
Mail Service;Firemen of Beaver Line, Bate of Wages, Fair Wages Resolution, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 906.
Canal Traffic Bill
c. 1R.* June 25, 1423.
Canterbury, Archbishop of
Bishopric of Southwark Bill, com., June 11, 7, 8.
Convocations of the Clergy Bill, 2R., June 13, 217.
Cape Colony
Financial Provision for Public Service in lieu of Taxation under Parliamentary Sanction, Prorogation of Parliament, etc.
Qs. Mr. E. Wason, Mr. J. Morley; As. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 25, 1391.
South African War, see that title.
Cape of Good Hope Observatory
Report Presented, June 11, 51; June 13, 215.
Cardiff
Coal Exports
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 14, 422.
Discrepancy between Figures supplied to Brown's Export List and those supplied to Board of Trade
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 25, 1402.
Cardiff Corporation Bill
l. Report* June 14, 377.
3R.* June 20, 871.
c. Lords Amendments,* June 26, 1509.
Carlile, Mr. W. W. (Bucks, N.)
Bucks Volunteers returned from South Africa;Thirty days' Furlough with Pay, June 17, 545.
Carnegie, Mr. Andrew
Gift to Scottish Universities
O. Mr. Pirie, June 19, 817.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1082, 1085, 1087, 1092, 1093, 1103.
Carrington, Gen. Sir F.
Appointment to Command in South Africa, Selection by War Office, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 17, 543.
Carson, Rt. Hon. Sir E. H.;Solicitor-General [Dublin University].
Cremation Bill, Con. June 19, 863, June 26, 1568, 1578.
Cathcart's, Lady Gordon, Estate
see Barra, Island of.
Cattle and Live Stock
Scotland;Breeding of Live Stock, Administration of Congested Districts Board
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131.
Stock Farms in South Africa, see Africa, South.
Causton, Mr. R. K. (Southwark, W.)
Bethlem Hospital Bill, 2R., June 17, 534.
Cautley, Mr. Henry S. (Leeds, E.)
Local Government Provisional Orders [Housing of Working Classes] (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 392.
Cavan;County Cavan.
Jones's, J. C. Estate, Delay in Sale of Land to Tenants
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 295.
Prison;Transfer to Military Authorities, Compensation to County Council.
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1418.
Cavendish, Mr. R. F. [Lancashire, N. Lonsdale]
"Euryalus", H.M.S., Fire on, June 11, 58.
Cayzer, Sir C. W. [Barrow-in-Furness]
Indian State Railways;Foreign Orders for Material, Return proposed, June 18, 707
Cecil, Lord Hugh [Greenwich]
Cremation Bill, Con. June 19, 859, 862; June 26, 1549, 1557, 1558, 1579.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R. June 19, 827, 844
Essendine Road Board School, Extension of;Opposition by Managers of Local Voluntary Schools, etc. June 13, 278
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R. June 19, 847, 840
Cecil, Mr. E. [Aston Manor]
South African War;Letters, Non-delivery to Troops, Complaints, June 20, 891
Census Returns
Aliens in London
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Long, 13 June, 280.
Ireland;Date of Issue, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 429.
Scotland;Return Presented, June 14, 406; June 17, 512.
Return relating to Valuation, Population, etc., of Counties and Boroughs
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. C. S. Dickson, June 24, 1219.
Central London Railway Bill
l. Report,* June 17, 511.
3R.* June 20, 871.
c. 1R.* June 21, 1050.
"Cervona"
Horse Transport from New Orleans;Horses thrown overboard, alleged to be suffering from Glanders
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1050.
Chairman of Committees
Rt. Hon. J. W. Lowther.
Chamberlain, Mr. Austen;Financial Secretary to the Treasury [Worcestershire, E.]
Africa, South;Non-delivery of Letters to Troops, Complaints, June 20, 891.
American Mails, Sorting on Board Ships during Voyage;Earlier Delivery of Letters from the North German Lloyd, etc., June 25, 1409.
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, 2R., June 18, 691, 692, 694, 695.
Birmingham Underground Electric Cable from London;Results of Working, etc., June 13, 283.
Canada
British Literature, Canadian Tariffs on;Proposed Reduction of Rate, June 18, 716.
Mail Service;Firemen of Beaver Line, Rate of Wages, June 20, 906.
Civil Servants
Boy Copyists, Number admitted since 1898, etc., June 17, 562.
Medical Inspection of Candidates;Fees, June 20, 905.
Surveyors of Taxes;Appointment of Clerks, Regulations, June 20, 906.
Colonies, Newspaper Postage;Reduction, proposed, June 25, 1412.
Distillation;Seizures and Rewards for Illicit Distillation, Return, June 25, 1411.
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1449.
House-to-House Letter Delivery authorised by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his Budget Speech of 1897;Number of Letters delivered, etc., June 25, 1410.
Ireland
Achill Postal Service, Sunday Delivery, June 24, 1219.
Ballinfull Post Office, Establishment of, proposed, June 18, 729.
Ballintogher;Postal Arrangements, Increasing Facilities, etc., June 17, 572.
Baltimore Postal Delivery, Improvement of, June 11, 68; June 24, 1220.
Cahirciveen Mail Service to Waterville, Improvement of, June 18, 729.
Clones Post Office, Free Medical Attendance for Officials, June 20, 924.
Enniscorthy Post Office, New;Delay in commencing Buildings, etc., June 18, 728.
Navan Mail Service;Delays, June 13, 296.
Postmen;Pay, Percentage of established Postmen, etc., June 18, 730.
Public Accounts, Auditing in Dublin, proposed, June 20, 923.
Jamaica, Government Inscribed Stock;Treasury Conditions under Colonial Stock Act, 1900, June 11, 61.
Keyham Barton Postal Staff, June 25, 1408.
Llannwchllyn Mail Service;Conveyance of Mails by Train from Bala proposed, June 11, 63.
Loans for Public Works;Newtown Urban District Council's Application for Loan for Gas Works refused, June 11, 62.
Mandat Carte System, Introduction of proposed, June 24, 1216.
Moneylenders;Prosecution of Moneylenders failing to register themselves, etc., June 18, 716.
Money Orders
Charges of English and French Money Orders compared, June 24, 1217.
Telegraphic System in India, Introduction into United Kingdom, proposed, June 24, 1217.
Newton Abbot Postmen's Petition, June 25, 1409.
Parcel Post;Buenos Ayres, Stamp Duty on Parcels, right of imposing Fiscal Charges, June 24, 1216.
P. and O. Company Mail Packet Contract;Accommodation for Lascars, etc., June 24, 1323, 1328.
Petherton, South, Post Office;Removal to another part of parish, June 13, 284.
Phthisis in the Post Office, Deaths from;Return proposed, June 18 719.
Police, Cost of, in England and Scotland;Return, June 13, 300.
Post Office Employees
Good Conduct Stripe;Soldiers returned from South Africa, June 17, 562.
Postal Order Branch;Women Clerks, Petition for Increase of Salary, June 13, 282.
Postmen
Bolton Postmen's Grievances, June 25, 1407.
Extra Pay;Queen Victoria's Funeral, June 24, 1219.
Somerset House Officials, etc., Assisting in Sorting in the evening, June 14, 424.
Post Office Savings Bank
Deposit by Cheques;Rule as to Acknowledgment, June 25, 1408.
Telegraphic withdrawals in 1900;Average cost, etc., June 18, 717.
Postage Stamps
Design and Colour of New Stamps, Approval of, June 24, 1218.
Perforation;Tendency to tear irregularly, June 11, 63.
Railway Companies and Telegraph Service;Value of Services rendered in 1900 and 1901, June 13, 281.
Salonika Post Office refusing to supply Postal Orders, June 25, 1407.
Scotland
Sheriff's Salaries;Proposed Increase, June 20, 905.
Stornoway Mail Service
Inviting Tenders for Mail Steamer Service, proposed, June 13, 284.
Steamer "Clydesdale," etc., June 24, 1323.
Telegraph Service
Efficiency Barrier;Technical Examination, June 24, 1217.
Ex-Submarine Telegraph Company's Clerks, Counting Service towards Pensions, June 14, 424.
Telephone Service
Northampton and London;Delays, June 13, 282.
Treasury Grant in 1899, Amount expended;London Exchange System, etc., June 18, 718.
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J.;Secretary of State for the Colonies [Birmingham, W.]
Cape Colony;Financial Provision for Public Service, Prorogation of Parliament, etc., June 25, 1391.
Imperial Court of Appeal, Establishment of, June 17, 552.
Crown Colony Representatives, June 24, 1201.
Malta;Language Question, Laying Papers on the Table, June 25, 1400.
Natal;Restrictions on British Owners of Farms, June 25, 1391.
Queensland;Asiatic Labour Bill, Refusal of Royal Assent, June 14, 416.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against, June 18, 707.
South African Constabulary;Service outside the Transvaal, etc., Force available, etc., June 18, 703.
South African Land Settlement;Report of Commission, June 17, 540.
South African War
Natives, Arrangements for Relief of, June 13, 260.
Prisoners;Boer Prisoners, Conditions of Repatriation, June 13, 260.
Transvaal
Concessions Committee Report;Inquiry into Mining Concession proposed, June 14, 410.
Financial Position
Barbour's, Sir D., Report of, June 11, 56; June 17, 539.
Taxation of Gold Mines;Special War Tax, proposed, June 24, 1195.
Natives;Use of Lash, Control of Native Labour, June 18, 702.
Transvaal and Orange River Colony, Constitution of Legislative Councils, etc., June 11, 56.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
Lord James of Hereford.
Chancellor of the Exchequer
Rt. Hon. Sir M. Hicks-Beach.
Channel Islands
Coal, Expert Duty, Exemption
Finance Bill Debate, June 25, 1499.
Channing, Mr. F. A. [Northamptonshire, E.]
Boer Prisoners;Internment in India, Un-healthiness of Situation, June 21, 1052.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 781, 787; June 20, 976; June 24, 1303.
Natal;British Owners of Farms, Removal of Restrictions suggested, June 25, 1391.
South African Land Settlement;Report of Commission, June 17, 540.
Telephone Service between Northampton and London;Delays, June 13, 282.
Chaplains
Prisons, Scotch Prisons;Salaries of Chaplains, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1114.
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. H. [Lincolnshire, Sleaford]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1529.
Business of the House, Government Business;Facilities for passing the Beer Bill, June 11, 89.
Charities
Durham, County of;Return Presented, June 24, 1194.
Charity Commissioners
Educational Endowment Schemes, Transfer of Powers to Board of Education;Draft Order in Council Presented, June 18, 685.
Schemes, Appeal against Dismissal of Head Teachers, etc.;Petition, June 11, 6.
Chester Corporation Tramways Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
Chester Gas Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 699.
Chesterfield Improvement Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
Chichester
Sanitary Matters;Local Government Board Report
O. Sir C. Dilke, June 11, 118.
Chief Secretary for Ireland
Rt. Hon. G. Wyndham.
Children
Bodies of deceased Infants, Disposed of;Discovery of Bodies in Undertakers' Cellar at Birmingham
Q. Sir J. Kennaway; A. Mr. Long, June 11, 60.
Employment of Children of School Age;Inter-Departmental Inquiry
Qs. Mr. Lough; As. Sir J. Gorst, Mr. Ritchie, June 18, 720.
Children's Bill
see Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill.
China
British Garrison;Composition of permanent Garrison
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 17, 551.
German Troops remaining in China, strength of, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 13, 270.
Indemnity
Amount of, etc.
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 20, 899.
Taxing Rice and Opium to pay Indemnity
Q. Sir M. Stewart; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 18, 710.
Kiao Chaow;Despatch of British Troops Q. Mr. Lanibert; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 13, 270.
Opium, Duty on, Increase in
Q. Sir J. Pease; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 24, 1202.
Shanghai
French Settlement;Acquisition of Tract of Land by the French beyond limit laid down by Anglo-French Agreement
Q. Mr. Gretton; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 25, 1399.
German Garrison, Retention of
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 11, 59.
Qs. Mr. Gretton, Mr. Walton; As. Vis. Cranborne, June 13, 270.
Q. Mr. Lloyd-George; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 17, 551.
Anglo German Agreement
Q. Mr. J. O'Kelly; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 14, 416.
Tariff, Concession to China of effective five per cent. Tariff;Guarantee for fulfilment of Treaty Obligations
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 25, 1400.
Tientsin;French and Indian Troops, Disturbance between
Q. Mr. C. Hobhouse; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 13, 269.
Trade Report Presented, June 17, 511.
War of 1856&#x2013;1862;Prize Money and Seymour Fund, Petition for Inquiry, June 11, 48; June 17, 512.
Yang-tsze Valley, British Interests in, Anglo-German Agreement
Q. Mr. Hemphill; A. Visc. Cranborne, June, 18, 710.
Yun-nan;French Railway from Tong-King to Yun-nan-fu
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Visc. Cranborne June 24, 1202.
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill
c. 2R., June 14, 386.
Instruction to Committee;Motion (Mr. Richards) June 21, 1025.
Church Discipline
Petitions, June 11, 48; June 14, 404 June 21, 1050.
City and South London Railway Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 698.
Con.* June 24, 1190.
City Charities
St. George, Botolph Lane, Parish of;Payment of Curate, etc.
Q. Mr. Tomlinson; A. Mr. G. Boscawen, June 21, 1066.
Civil List Bill
c. 3R., June 11, 143.
l. 1R.* June 20, 882.
2R.* June 21, 1025.
Com.* and Report, June 24, 1185.
3R.* June 25, 1350.
Civil List Bill
Debate on Third Reading (Commons), June 11, 143; June 18, 736.
Cornwall, Duke of;Position as Landlord, etc., 143, 737.
Cornwall and Lancaster, Duchies of;Inclusion in Surrender of Hereditary Revenues, 744, 746, 749.
Crown Lands;Ownership by the Sovereign, Personally or as Head of the State, 739, 743, 746, 748, 750.
Expenditure of Other Countries;United States, President's Income, 745.
Payment to the Royal Family out of the Consolidated Fund instead of by Hereditary Revenues, 736.
Civil Service
Army Clothing Department Writers, see Army.
Boy Copyists, Number admitted since 1898, etc.
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 17, 562.
Medical Inspection of Candidates;Fees
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 905.
Superannuation, Appointments Without Certificate;Treasury Minute Presented, June 24, 1184, 1194.
Civil Service Estimates
see Supply.
Clancy, Mr. J. J. [Dublin Co., N.]
Belfast Riots;Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, June 14, 445.
Clare
South and West Clare Railways, Taxing Electoral Divisions of Dromane, etc., Proposed Remission
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 917.
Cleveland and Durham County Electric Power Bill
l. 2R.* June 13, 213.
Clones
Post Office;Free Medical Attendance for Officials
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 923.
Coal
Export Duty on;Budget Proposals
Customs House Rules;Coal sold on board at British Port, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 18, 712.
Exemptions
Contracts entered into before Budget Statement
Q. Mr. Plummer; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 21, 1061; Q. Mr. M'Arthur; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 20, 901; Q. Mr. S. Evans; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 25, 1395; Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 25, 1398.
Finance Bill Debate, June 18, 785; June 24, 1263; June 25, 1437.
Ad valorem Duty, proposed, 1450.
Bunker Coal shipped on Foreign Vessels, Exemption, 1496.
Channel Islands, Exemption proposed, 1499.
Coke, Culm and Cinders, Exemption of, 1460, 1497.
Contracts, Exemptions proposed, 1270, 1485.
Date of levying Duty;"As from" and "On and after,' similarity of Terms, 785, 1295.
Foreigner, Tax to be paid by, 1463.
Patent Fuel, Duty on, 1272, 1447, 1497.
Royalty Owners, Payment of Portion of Tax, 1464.
"Small Coal," Definition of, 1437.
Supply of Coal, etc., Inquiry proposed, 1306.
Wages, Effect on, Position of Workmen, etc., 1273.
Gibraltar, Exemption of, proposed
Q. Mr. E. Robertson; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 24, 1205.
Italian Contracts, Effect on,
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 20, 901.
Small Coal;Proposed Reduction of Duty
Qs. Mr. Renwick, Mr. D. A. Thomas; As. Sir M. H. Beach, June 18, 713.
Exports;Cardiff and Newport
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 14, 422.
Figures supplied to Brown's Export List and Board of Trade, Discrepancy between,
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 25, 1402.
Inquiry into Coal Question
Qs. Mr. D. A. Thomas; As. Sir M. H. Beach, June 20, 902; June 24, 1206; June 25, 1398.
Production, Consumption and Export of Coal, etc., in principal Countries of the World;Return Ordered, June 14, 406;Presented June 17, 538.
Trade Statistics;Return,
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 25, 1402.
Coal Mines
Explosives;Adding to Special list;Delay in issuing Order in Council,
Q. Capt. Bagot; A. Mr. Ritchie; June 13, 274.
Coal Mines (Employment) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 48; June 12, 146; June 21, 1050.
Coast Guard Service
Wrecks off the Devonshire Coast;"Did the Coastguards do their Duty?" etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 13, 344.
Cochrane, Mr. T. H. [Ayrshire, N.]
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 165.
Cockerton Judgment
see Education;Higher Elementary Education.
Coddington, Sir W. [Blackburn]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bil, 2R., June 17, 644.
Cogan, Mr. D. J. [Wicklow, E.]
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 808.
Cohen, Mr. B. [Islington, E.]
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 854.
St. Bartholomew's Hospital Bill, 2R., June 24, 1188.
Colchester
Murder Charge;Arrest of C. Lillywhite, Compensation Question
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 25, 1404.
Training Ground of the Army Corps
Os. Duke of Bedford, Lord Raglan, June 25, 1369, 1384.
Collieries
Wales, see that title.
Collings, Right Hon. Jesse;Under Secretary to the Home Office [Birmingham, Bordesley]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1517.
Colomb, Sir J. [Great Yarmouth]
Army Reform;Staff, Number and Estimated Cost, Return Proposed, June 20, 892.
Navy
Foreign Stations, Naval Staffs employed on, June 14, 474, 476.
"Sybille," H.M.S., Wreck of;Composition of Force Afloat and Ashore, June 20, 895.
Colonial Office
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. J. Chamberlain.
Parliamentary Secretary;Earl of Onslow.
Colonial Acts Confirmation Bill
c. Intro., June 13, 330.
Colonial Stock Act, 1900
Jamaica Government Inscribed Stock and Treasury Conditions
Q. Mr. A. Gibbs: A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 61.
Colonies
Annual Reports Presented, June 20, 873, 885; June 25, 1344, 1390.
British Import Tariff;Preferential Treatment of the Colonies with reference to Tea and Sugar Duties
Debate on the Finance Bill, June 18, 765; June 20, 929; June 24, 1231.
Imperial Court of Appeal, Establishment of
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 17, 552.
Newspaper Postage;Reduction Proposed
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1411.
Colville, Mr. J. [Lanark, N.E.]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1472.
Colwyn Bay, and Colwyn Urban District Gas Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
Commerce, Minister of
Appointment proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 18, 731.
Commercial Intelligence Committee
Constitution and Terms of Reference
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour June 21, 1063.
Committees
Commons, Standing Committees
Chairman's Panel;Appointment of Mr. L. Hardy, etc., June 14, 407.
Members discharged and Members added, June 14, 407; June 21, 1081; June 25, 1422.
Commons Regulation and Inclosure (Skipworth) Provisional Order Bill
l. 2R.* June 21, 1024.
com.* and Report, June 24, 1183.
3R.* June 25, 1344.
Condensed Milk
Sugar Duty, Budget Proposals;Finance Bill Debate, June 24, 1259.
Congested Districts, Ireland
Bawnboy Rural District;Scheduling as Congested Districts
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 918.
Congested Districts Board, Scotland
Administration;Defects, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131.
Croir Farm, see Lewis, Island of
Ross and Cromarty;Non-acquisition of Land, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 20, 911.
Consolidated Fund Bills
Procedure;Resolutions in Com. of Ways and Means, Discussion must be confined to subject actually involved
Debate, June 25, 1424.
Consolidated Fund (No. 2) Bill
c. 1R.* June 26, 1584.
Resolution in Com. of Ways and Means, June 25, 1423;Resolution Reported, June 26, 1545.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
Arms, etc., of Belfast Constabulary
Q. Mr. J. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1223.
Cork Gas Workers' Strike, Sergeant Williams' Interference with, alleged
Q. Mr. J. F. X. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1076.
Grievances;Report of Inquiry
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 428.
Killarney International Boat Race;Police at Queenstown asking Names of Visitors, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 11, 66.
Mayo, County;Number of Police, 1895&#x2013;1900, Extra Police, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 912.
O'Reilly, Sergeant, Action of;Extracting Information from M. Dolan's Son
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 13, 291.
Police Protection, Sligo;Case of Mr. Phibbs, see Sligo.
Retirements on Pensions during last 12 months
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 426.
Return
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1220.
Sharkey, Sergeant, Case of
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1074.
Sheridan, Sergeant, and Constable Mahony, discharge of
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 294.
United Irish League Meetings, see Names of Places.
Constantinople
Riots in 1896;British Merchants' Compensation Claims, Delay in Payments
Q. Mr. Stevenson; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 13, 272.
Consular Service
see Diplomatic and Consular Service.
Contagious Diseases
Aliens suffering from, United States Regulation;Simular Regulation for Great Britain, proposed
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Long, June 25, 1406.
Contagious Diseases, Animals
Compulsory Slaughter;Higher Compensation, proposed
Q. Mr. L. Sinclair; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 14, 423.
Convicts
Conditional Licences Granted, June 20, 874, 886.
Convocations of the Clergy Bill
l. 2R., June 13, 217.
Com.* June 17, 524.
Report,* June 17, 524; June 25, 1345.
Cooper's Hill College
Indian Students Limitation;Dismissal of Professors, Inadequate Engineering Works in India, etc.
O. Lord Stanley of Alderley, June 13, 220.
Corbett, Mr. T. L. [Down, N.]
Board of Intermediate Education, Ireland, Constitution of, June 25, 1415.
Hours of Attendance at School, Regulations, June 24, 1223.
Cork, County Cork, etc.
Gas Workers' Strike;Sergeant Williams' Interference, alleged
Q. Mr. J. F. X. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1076.
Land Purchase;J. Cronin's Farms, Insufficiency of Purchase Money to redeem superior Interests, etc.
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 297.
Poor Rate Collectors;Method of making Lodgments, Allocation of Interest, etc.
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 916.
Cork, Blackrock, and Passage Railway Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1335.
Cornwall, Duchy of
Hereditary Revenues Surrender of;Inclusion of Duchy of Cornwall
References to, in Debate on Civil List Bill, June 18, 744, 746, 749.
Corporal Punishment
Flogging of Soldier on Transport Ship;Transport of Mules from Naples to Port Elizabeth
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1393.
Corsica
Trade Report Presented, June 11, 6.
County Council (Bye-laws) Bill
l. 1R.* June 13, 216.
2R., June 20, 880.
Com., June 21, 1025.
Report,* June 25, 1345.
County Courts (Ireland) Bill
l. Report* June 14, 383.
3R.* June 18, 686.
c. 1R.* June 21, 1081.
County Offices and Courts (Ireland) Act
Account of Receipts and Payments Presented, June 20, 874, 885.
Courts-Martial
South African War, see that title.
Cowes Ferry Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253.
Crahborne, Visc.;Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs [Rochester]
Africa, East;Native Labour, Sir L. Matthews' Recommendations, June 24, 1204.
Alien Immigrants in London;Warning as to Prospects of Pauper Aliens, etc. June 17, 553.
China
Indemnity
Amount of, etc., June 20, 899.
Taxing Rice and Opium to pay Indemnity, June 18, 710.
Kiao Chaow;Despatch of British Troops, June 13, 271.
Opium Duty, Increase in, June 24, 1202.
Shanghai
French Settlement, Acquisition of Tract of Land by the French beyond limit laid down by Anglo-French Agreement, June 25, 1400.
German Garrison at, June 11, 59; June 13, 270; June 14, 416; June 17, 551.
Tariff, Concession of Effective Five per Cent. Tariff;Compensating Trading Advantages, etc., June 25, 1400.
Yang-tsze Valley, British Interests in;Anglo-German Agreement, June 18, 710.
Yun-nan;French Railway from Tong-king to Yun-nan-fu, June 24, 1202.
Diplomatic and Consular Service
Retired Naval and Military Officers holding Appointments without passing Examination in Foreign Languages, June 18, 711.
United States, Germany and France;Annual Cost of Service, June 20, 899.
Jubaland Expedition;Total Cost, etc., June 13, 272.
Mexico;Mr. Emett, English Mine Manager, Murder of, June 18, 711.
Mombasa;Government Cargoes for, Charter of Vessels, etc., June 13, 273.
Morocco;French Influence in, June 11, 59.
Patagonia;Welsh Settlement in, Report of Chaplain of H.M.S. "Flora," etc., June 13, 273.
Red Sea Lights;Construction, etc., June 24, 1205.
Russia;Thibet Mission from to Solicit Protection against British Encroachment, alleged, June 21, 1060.
Turkey
Anatolian Railway;Consular Report, June 24, 1203.
Constantinople Riots;British Merchants' Compensation Claims, June 13, 273.
Konia;Abolition of British Vice-Consulate, June 18, 711.
Railway Concessions to German Syndicate, etc., June 18, 709.
Tariff Charges in Asia Minor, proposed increase in, June 24, 1203.
Zanzibar and Pemba, Slavery in
Compensation for Slaves freed, Abolition of System, June 24, 1204.
Procuring Native Labour from British East Africa;Sir L. Mathew's Suggestion, etc., June 18, 708.
Crean, Mr. E. [Cork, S. E.]
Barrow Drainage Question;Facilities for Discussion, June 11, 101.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 782, 796; June 20, 1020.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 397.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 499.
Cremation Bill
c. Con., June 19, 859; June 26, 1549.
Cremation Bill
Debate on Consideration (Commons), June 19, 859; June 26, 1549.
Donation of Land, Burial Authority accepting, 1571.
Ireland, Extension of Bill to, 860, 1575, 1577, 1578, 1579.
Scotland
Burial Authority, Definition of, 862, 863, 864, 1550, 1551, 1552, 1553, 1563.
Extension of Bill to, 859, 860,861, 862, 863, 864, 865, 866.
Rating Powers, etc., 1557, 1558, 1559.
Site of Crematorium, 1567.
"Cressy," H.M.S.
Breakdown of Steering Gear;Laying Report of Court of Inquiry on the Table proposed
Q. Col. Lucas; A. Mr. Pretyman, June 13, 269.
Crewe, Earl of
Leeds Corporation Water Bill;Locus Standi Question, June 24, 1175.
Crofters and Cottars
Barra, Island of;Application for Purchase of Land from Lady Gordon Cathcart, Disturbances arising out of, etc.
Debate in Com, of Supply, June 21, 1141.
Needs of;Administration by the Congested Districts Board, Defects, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131.
Crombie, Mr. J. W. [Kincardineshire]
Business of the House;Facilities for passing the Children's Bill, June 11, 97.
Food and Drugs Act Prosecutions;Analysis of Local Public Analysts, etc., June 18, 714.
Modern Languages and Public Service, Examinations;Proposed Appointment of Committee, June 11, 68.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1512.
Cromer Water Bill
c. 3R.* June 13, 251.
l. 1R.* June 14, 379.
Cross, Mr. A. [Glasgow, Camlachie]
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 957, 999, 1003, 1007; June 25, 1462, 1497.
Crown
Income Tax, Payment by the Crown
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 18, 713.
Crown Lands
Civil List Bill, see that title.
Cuidad Bolivar
Trade Report Presented, June 24, 1184.
Cullinan, Mr. J. [Tipperary, S.]
Direct Labour, Employment of, Formulating Schemes, etc., in anticipation of Provisional Order, June 20, 921.
Dublin Four Courts;Taxing Masters' Salaries, etc., June 17, 571.
Local Government Provisional Order Bill, Ireland;Putting in Force from September 30, proposed, June 17, 570.
"Cumberland," H.M.S.
Boilers;Progress in Construction, etc.
Qs. Sir F. Flannery, Mr. Kearley; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 25, 1395.
Curtin, J.
Case of;Deceased Soldiers' Estates
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 546.
Customs
Passengers' Luggage, Examination of, at Southampton, etc.
Qs. Mr. Murphy, Mr. P. O'Brien; As. Mr. Ritchie, Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 903.
Customs Duties
see Import Duties.
Cycles
Light Railways Bill;Provision for Conveyance of Cycles, etc., proposed
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. G. Balfour June 13, 277.
Railway Rates
Os. Mr. Bryce, June 13, 370; Mr. G. Balfour, 371.
D
Dairy Industry
Ireland, see that title.
Dalkeith, Earl of [Roxburgh]
"Victoria and Albert," new Royal Yacht-Expenditure on, Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 485.
Daly, Mr. J. [Monaghan, S.]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1538.
Paupers, Ireland, Cost of Maintenance;Difference in Cost in various Unions, June 25, 1416.
Dalziel, Mr. J. H. [Kirkcaldy Burghs]
Transvaal;Financial Condition, Sir D. Barbour's Report, June 17, 539.
Darcy de Knayth, Meynill and Fauconberg, Baronies
Petition of Countesses of Yarborough and Powis;considered by Committee for Privileges, June 25, 1333.
"Daring" H.M.S.
Boiler Explosion
Qs. Mr. Lambton; Mr. W. Allan, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. Arnold Forster, June 11, 57.
Davies, Mr. A. [Carmarthen Boroughs
American Mails;Sorting Mails on board ships during Voyage, Earlier Delivery of letters from the North German Lloyd steamers, etc., June 25, 1409.
Llanelly, Education Question;Proposed Temporary Bill, June 20, 907.
Old Age Pensions;Heart of Oak Benefit Society Resolution, June 20, 926.
Transvaal Finances;Taxation of Gold Mines, Special War Tax, proposed, June 24, 1195.
Deceased Soldiers' Estates
see Army.
Deck Cargoes
Board of Trade Regulations;Case of the "Mobile," etc.
Os. Lord Muskerry, Earl of Dudley, June 17, 524.
Declarations
Oaths and Declarations of Heads of States on Accession touching Religion;Return
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 289.
Deer Forests, Scotland
Killilan Forest, Extension of;Alleged clearing and afforesting of Faddoch Farm, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray June 13, 286.
Delany, Mr. W. [Queen's Co., Ossory]
Barrow Drainage;Legislation, June 11, 99.
Limerick Disturbances;Case of Dr. Long, June 18, 723.
Soldiers' Parents, Maintenance of;Case of C. Guilfoile, June 20, 893.
Tullamore Quarter Sessions;Crown v. Peterson. Order made by Judge, Laying Copy on the Table, June 17, 569.
Demise of the Crown Bill
l. 1R.* June 11, 9.
2R. June 17, 526.
Com. * and Report. June 18, 686.
Report,* June 25, 1345.
Denbigh, Earl of
Purchase of Land (Ireland) Bill, 2R., June 18, 685.
Sligo County Council Printing Contract, June 14, 383.
Denny, Col. J. M. [Kilmarnock Burghs]
Burgh Auditors in Scotland;Powers of Secretary for Scotland to appoint, June 11, 65.
Mombasa, Government Cargoes for;Charter of Vessels, etc., June 13, 273.
Deptford
Labourers' Wages, Increase in Concession
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 14, 467.
Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Electric Power Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Derry
see Londonderry.
Derwent Valley Water Board Bill
l. Report,* June 21, 1021.
Deserters
see Army.
Devolution of Parliamentary Business
see Business of the House.
Devonport
Keyham Barton Postal Staff;Increase in Staff
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1407.
Devonshire Coast
Wrecks;"Did the Coast Guards do their duty?"
Debate in Com. of Supply June 13, 344.
Dewar, Mr. John [Inverness]
Barra, Island of;Purchase of land from Lady Gordon Cathcart for Crofters and Cottars, Disturbances arising out of, June 21, 1141.
Congested Districts Board Administration;Improvement in Stock, Construction of Piers and Roads, Settling People an the Land, etc., June 21, 1138.
Dewar, Mr. Thomas [Tower Hamlets, St. George's]
Alien Immigrants in London; Warnings as to Prospects of Pauper Aliens, etc., June 17, 552.
Birmingham Underground Electric Cable from London;Results of Working, etc., June 13, 283.
Postmen;Good Conduct Stripe, Soldiers returned from South Africa, June 17, 562.
Volunteer Officers;Man&#x0153;uvres, Additional Allowances for Field Officers, June 17, 544.
"Diadem," H.M.S.
Death of Roman Catholic Seamen;Religious Ministrations
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Arnold Forster, June 20, 896; June 24, 1198.
Dickson, Mr. C. S.;Solicitor-General for Scotland (Glasgow, Bridgton)
Census, Scotland;Return of Valuation, Population, etc., of Counties and Boroughs, June 24, 1219.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 26, 1552, 1563.
Prisons, Scotland, Administration;appointment of Governors;Visiting Committees;Medical Officers;Treatment of Sick Prisioners, etc., June 21, 1125.
Digby, Mr. J. K. Wingfield;[Dorset, N.]
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 847.
Dilke, Rt. Hon. Sir Charles [Gloucester, Forest of Dean]
Dockyard Labourers;Advance of Wages for Deptford Men, Position of Devonport Men, etc., June 14, 471.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 11, 111, 115, 129, 132, 137.
Guernsey Militia;Reorganisation, June 11, 55.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 181.
Naval Estimates;Bringing, forward Personnel Vote before Materiel, Opportunity for discussing Shipbuilding Programme, etc., June 14, 505, 507.
Seamen of the Merchant Service, Number, Ages and Ratings;Return, June 21, 1061.
Dillon, Mr. J. [Mayo, E.]
Army Contracts and Commissions;Government Orders for Kharki Cloth, Wrench v. Langworthy Bros. &amp; Co., June 20, 895.
Arizona Copper Company Limited Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 11, 41, 43, 46; Joint Committee of Lords and Commons, June 13, 250.
China;Indemnity, Amount, etc., June 20, 899.
Consolidated Fund Bills, Resolution in Com. of Ways and Means;Raising Question of the Conduct of the War in South Africa, June 25, 1424, 1425.
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Discharge of Sergeant Sheridan and Constable Mahony, June 13, 294, 295.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 1007, 1014, 1018.
Fitzgerald Estate;Receiver Suing for Hanging Gale, June 20, 922.
Intermediate Education, Ireland, Teaching Irish Language, etc.;New Rules, June 21, 1158.
Lascars on P. and O. Steamers, Accommodation, etc., June 24, 1326, 1328.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 4) (Ireland) Bill, 2R., June 11, 40, 41.
Police Protection in Sligo;Case of Mr. Phibbs, June 25, 1414.
South African War
Conduct of the War;Keeping people in ignorance as to what was going on in South Africa, etc., June 25, 1423, 1425.
Farm Burning;Action of General Rundle, Blowing up Mills, etc., June 13, 262.
Refuge Camps
Johannesburg, Mortality at, June 13, 263.
Permission to leave Camps, June 21, 1053, 1054.
University Education (Ireland) Commission;Terms of Reference, June 13, 298.
Dimsdale, Sir J. C. [London]
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill, 2R., June 14, 386;Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1030, 1034, 1042.
South Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railway Bill, 2R., June 11, 22.
Dingle Bay
Trawling;Prosecutions, Proposed Alteration of Law
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 568.
Diplomatic and Consular Service
Retired Naval and Military Officers holding Appointments without passing Examination in Foreign Languages
Q. Mr. Harris; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 18, 710.
Turkey;Abolition of British Vice-Consulate at Konia
Q. Earl Percy; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 18, 711.
United States, Germany and France;Annual Cost of Services
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 20, 899.
Diseases of Animals
see Contagious Diseases.
Distillation
Illicit Distillation Seizures in Scotland and Ireland, etc.;Return
Qs. Mr. O'Mara, Mr. J. Redmond, Mr. Lough; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1410.
Distribution of Parliamentary Time
see Parliamentary Time.
Dixon-Hartland, Sir F (Middlesex, Uxbridge)
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill;Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1027.
Dock Labourers
Factory and Workshop Acts
O. Mr. T. P. O'Connor, June 11, 142.
Dockyards
Grievances of Workmen;Right of Petition
Os. Mr. Duke, Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 14, 475.
Haulbowline;Construction of second Dry Dock, proposed
Q. Captain Donelan; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 17, 550.
Machinists and Spinners, Wages Concession
O. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 14, 470.
Recorders of Work, Increase of Wages
O. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 14, 469.
Shipwrights, Abolition of Classification and increase of Wages, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 14, 469.
Wages
Increase of Wages for Deptford Labourers
Position of Hired Men, etc.
Os. Mr. E. J. C. Morton, June 14, 473, 476.
Statement;Mr. Arnold-Forster and Debate in Com. of Supply, June 14, 467.
Dogs
Regulation (Ireland) Act, 1855;Accounts Presented, June 13, 258; June 14, 382.
Doncaster Tithe Trust Bill
l. Report,* June 21, 1021.
Donelan, Capt. A. J. C. [Cork, E.]
Haulbowline Dockyard, Dry Docks;Construction of second Dock, proposed, June 17, 550.
Limerick Disturbances;Case of Dr. Long, June 18, 723.
Meat;Poisoned Tinned Meat at Fermanagh Barracks, June 17, 547.
United Irish League Meetings and Action of Police, June 11, 66; June 13, 293.
Dorking Gas Bill
l. 2R.* June 21, 1022.
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers;First Commissioner of Works [Kent, St. Augustine's]
Government Offices, Death of Architects;Carrying out Designs of Mr. Young and Mr. Brydon, June 14, 426.
Mall, Alteration of;Exhibiting proposed Designs, June 18, 721.
National Gallery, Protection from Fire;Mr. Sherman's Report, June 11, 65; June 17, 564.
National Gallery (Purchase of adjacent land) Bill, 2R., June 17, 677.
Richmond Park
Gatekeepers, Appointment of;Claims of old Soldiers, June 17, 563.
Oaks;Planting Oak Saplings, June 18, 720.
Royal Palaces;Structural Alterations and Drainage Works, Supplementary Estimate, June 18, 721.
Dover Corporation Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. 1R.* June 13, 255.
Dover Harbour Bill
l. Report,* June 17, 511.
3R.* June 21, 1023.
c. 1R.* June 24, 1193.
Drainage Works
Ireland;Arterial Drainage, Government Assistance, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 296.
Drainage and Improvement of Land (Ireland) Provisional Order Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com. * and Report* June 24, 1181.
3R.* June 25, 1343.
Drinking Places for Animals
Providing Public Drinking Places with Standpipes and Taps
Q. Mr. L. Sinclair; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 14, 423.
Dromore
Unsanitary Condition of Tenement Houses Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1417.
Drunkards Bill
l. Report*, June 11, 7; June 14, 383.
3R., June 20, 874.
Petitions, June 11, 7; June 14, 382.
Dublin;County Dublin, etc.
Bradshaw, Rev. Nevin, Assault on, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Johnston; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1078.
Four Courts;Taxing Masters' Salaries, etc.
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 571.
Industrial Schools, Establishment of, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 288.
Marlborough Street Training College-Appointment of Principal
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1073.
Metropolitan Police;Sending to Hythe for Musketry Drill, etc., alleged
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 11, 68.
National Library;Offer of American Patent Specifications, Completing East Wing, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 287.
Police Court Fines in 1899, Allocation of
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 20, 923.
Volunteers, Drilling with Regulars at Portobello Barracks
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 414.
Dublin Corporation Bill
c. 2R.* June 17, 676.
Dublin Corporation (Markets, etc.) Bill
l. 2R.* June 20, 871.
Dublin (Equalisation of Bates) Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Dublin Fusiliers
South African War;Prisoners rejoining Regiment, Arrears of Pay, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 703.
Dublin, St. James' Gate Brewery Tramways Bill
l. Report,* June 17, 511.
3R.* June 21, 1023.
Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford Railway (New Boss and Waterford Extension) Bill
c. Ordered, June 11, 48.
1R.* June 12, 145.
Dudley, Earl of;Secretary to the Board of Trade.
Board of Trade Nautical Staff;Return, June 18, 687.
Deck Cargoes, Board of Trade Regulations;Casa of the "Mobile," etc., June 17, 525.
Merchant Shipping; Act (1894) Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 520.
Seamen's Food and Accommodation;Committee of Inquiry, June 18, 688.
Duffy, Mr. W. J. [Galway, S.]
Clare, South and West Clare Railways;Taxing Electoral Divisions of Dromane, etc., June 20, 917.
Loughrea Heather Burning Case;Application for Compensation, etc., June 24, 1225.
Tawin Water Supply;Absence of Fresh Water, June 17, 567.
Duke, Mr. H. E. [Plymouth]
Dockyard Labourers;Right of Petition, etc., June 14, 475.
Dungourney and Mogeely
United Irish League Meetings;Action of Police
Qs. Capt. Donelan, Mr. Power, Mr. Flavin; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 11, 66.
Dunraven, Earl of
Army
Army Corps Organisation, Constitution of, June 13, 229.
Reform and Reorganisation, Government Proposals;Inadequate Terms offered to Recruits, etc., June 25, 1374.
Durham, County of
Inquiry into Charities;Return Presented, June 24, 1194.
Dyke, Rt. Hon. Sir W. Hart [Kent, Dartford]
Agricultural Instruction;Transferring Duties to Board of Education, proposed, June 24, 1213.
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill;Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1037.
Inspection of Schools;Applications for Inspection, Number of, etc., June 24, 1214.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1159.
E
Ealing, Borough of
Charter of Municipal Incorporation Presented, June 12, 148; June 13, 215.
East India
see India.
East and West Union Light Railway
Order Presented, June 14, 381, 406.
Easton and Church Hope Railway Bill
l. Report,* June 17, 510.
3R.* June 21, 1023.
c. 1R.* June 24, 1192.
Eccles Corporation Bill
c. Con. * June 12, 145.
3R.* June 17, 536.
l. 1R.* June 18, 683.
Edinburgh
Electric Train Accidents in 1901, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 14, 425.
National Gallery
Expenditure;Loan Collection, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1106.
"Handicapped by being tied up in the Board of Manufactures with a bundle of other Institutions"
O. Sir J. Stirling-Maxwell, June 21, 1107.
Purchase of Pictures, Grant for
Os. Mr. A. G. Murray; Sir J. Stirling-Maxwell, June 21, 1109.
Vote for, June 21, 1106.
Observatory Royal;Annual Report Presented June 11, 6, 51.
Sasine Office
Registration Fees;Rescinding Order of 1881, proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 25, 1412.
Returns;Omission in Judicial Statistics
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 18, 720.
Education
President;Duke of Devonshire.
Vice-President;Rt. Hon. Sir J. E. Gorst.
Attendance Exemptions
Standards of;Return Presented, June 11, 51.
Walsall School;Powers of School Board, etc.
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 908.
Essendine Road Board School, Extension of;Opposition by Managers of Local Voluntary Schools, etc.
Q. Lord H. Cecil; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 13, 278.
Evening Continuation Classes, Position of such Bodies as the Polytechnic, etc., should the Education Bill become Law.
Q. Mr. B. Langley; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 25, 1413.
Evening School Code for 1901;Date of Issue
Q. Dr. Macnamara; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 13, 280.
Higher Elementary Education;Cockerton Judgment, etc.
Arrangements for Winter Session 1901&#x2013;2;Surcharges by Auditors, etc.
Q. Dr. Macnamara; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 18, 730.
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Mr. W. Long, June 20, 909.
Leeds School Board Letter and Circular, etc.
Q. Mr. Jackson; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 908.
School Boards arranging with Municipal Authorities for the Continuation of Evening School Work, Funds at the Disposal of Local Authorities, Question of Legality of Expenditure, etc.
Qs. Dr. Macnamara; As. Sir J. Gorst, June 21, 1070; June 24, 1214; June 25, 1412.
Higher Grade and Evening Continuation Schools;Petitions, June 14, 49.
Inspection of Schools;Number of Applications for Inspection, etc.
Q. Sir W. H. Dyke; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 24, 1214.
Ireland
Fermanagh Royal School Endowment, see title Fermanagh
Hours of Attendance at School;Regulations
Q. Mr. Corbett; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1223.
Intermediate Education;(Technical Instruction)
Account of Receipts and Expenditure for 1900, Presented June 14, 406.
Board of, Number of Members, Number of Roman Catholics, Protestants, etc.
Q. Mr. T. L. Corbett; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1415.
Rules and Programme;New Rules, etc.
Attaching Marks to Honour Subjects
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 565.
Percentage of Junior Grade Students passing Senior Grade
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1072.
Preparatory Grade Prizes, Discontinuance of
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 915.
Resolution [Mr. T. O'Donnell] June 21, 1151.
Irish Language, see that title.
National School Teachers, see that title.
University Education, see Ireland
Libraries in Elementary Schools;Legality of Expenditure on
Q. Mr. G. White; A. Mr. W. Long, June 25, 1406.
Pupil Teachers, see sub-heading Teachers
Science and Art Directory Presented, June 11, 6; June 12, 148.
Scotland
Age of Exemption
O. Dr. Macnamara, June 21, 1104.
Annual Report Presented, June 19, 815; June 20, 873.
Carnegie's, Mr. Andrew, Gift
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1082, 1085, 1087, 1089, 1092, 1093, 1103.
Expenses, Vote for, June 21, 1082.
General Report for 1900 Presented, June 14, 380, 404.
Higher Elementary School System O. Dr. Macnamara, June 21, 1104.
Secondary and Technical Education, Distribution of Fund;Minute Presented, June 14, 380, 404.
University System and Training College System, Comparative Merits, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1083, 1090, 1092, 1094, 1095, 1099, 1100, 1102.
Secondary and Technical Instruction
Minute sanctioning Subjects to be Taught under Clause 8 Presented, June 24, 1194; June 25, 1344.
Teachers
Dismissal of
Charity Commissioners' Schemes, Petition, June 11, 7.
Government Legislation
Os. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 71; Mr. Crombie, 97; Q. Mr. C. Shaw; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 17, 563.
Pupil Teachers;King's Scholarship Examination, Number of Teachers from County Schools examined in 1900, etc
Q. Mr. Llewellyn; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 18, 719.
Registration of, Regulations for
Q. Mr. Bond; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 21, 1070.
Voluntary Schools, see that title.
Wales
County Schools and the Urban Authorities
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 24, 1214.
Intermediate Schools, Urban District Council's Share in Control of, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 21, 1071.
Llanelly, Public Meeting at;Temporary Education Bill, proposed
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 907.
(see also Education Bill).
Education Bill
Business of the House
Statement (Mr. A. J. Balfour), June 11, 71.
Petitions, June 12, 146; June 13, 256; June 17, 538; June 18, 699; June 20, 884; June 21, 1050; June 24, 1193; June 26, 1509.
Wales
County Schools;Proposed Exemption from Section 6, Sub-Section 2
Q. Mr. Moss; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 907.
Technical Instruction;Proposed Clause, etc.
Q. Mr. G. Kenyon; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 908.
Education, Board of
Agriculture, Board of;Transfer of Duties to the Board of Education
Qs. Sir W. H. Dyke, Mr. W. Palmer; As. Mr. Hanbury, June 24, 1212.
Charity Commissioners' Powers, Transfer of, to Board of Education;Draft Order in Council Presented, June 18, 685.
Superannuation;Granting Retired Allowance to Mr. A. C. G. Cameron.
Treasury Minute Presented, June 26, 1511.
Technological Work;Report of Committee
Q. Mr. Bond; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 13, 278.
Education Board Provisional Order Confirmation (Acton) Bill
c. 2R.* June 11, 47.
Report* June 20, 884.
3R.* June 21, 1049.
Education Board Provisional Order Confirmation (Barnes, etc.) Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 20, 872.
Report* June 24, 1173.
Com. * June 25, 1343.
Education Board Provisional Order Confirmation (London) Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 20, 872.
Com. * June 24, 1182.
3R.* June 25, 1343.
Education (Continuation Schools) Bill
Petitions, June 24, 1193; June 21, 1050; June 26, 1509.
Education (Scotland) Bill
c. Con., June 12, 149.
3R., June 19, 815.
Petitions, June 13, 256.
l. 1R.* June 20, 882.
Education (Scotland) Bill
Debate on Consideration (Commons), June 12, 149; Third Reading, June 19, 815.
Age Limit for Compulsory Attendance, Raising, 155, 158, 822, 830, 832, 837.
Amendment of Title of Bill, 815.
Education (Scotland) Act, 1878, Application of Section 7, 836, 846.
Casual Employment of Children, Morning Employment, etc., 159,161, 162,163, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 824, 825, 830, 840, 841, 846.
Elementary Education, Definition of, 827, 844.
Highland Crofting Counties, Schools in;Removal of Names of exempted Children from Attendance Register, 835, 846.
Repeal of Present Law, 820, 843.
School Boards, Powers of granting Exemptions, 149, 151, 152, 172, 174, 821, 838.
Voluntary Schools, authority to give Exemptions, proposed, 150,151, 152, 153, 837.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill
Title altered to Education (Scotland) Bill.
Egypt
Arabi Pasha and other Exiles, Release of Os. Lord Newton, Marquess of Lansdowne, June 17, 527.
Electric Lighting Acts
Proceedings of Board of Trade Presented, June 24, 1194; June 25, 1344.
Special Report by Board of Trade Presented, June 14, 382, 405.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 1) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 698.
Con., June 19, 813.
3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 872.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com. * June 21, 1024.
3R.* June 24, 1182.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 3) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com. * June 21, 1024.
3R.* June 24, 1182.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 4) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com.* June 21, 1024.
3R.* June 24, 1182.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 5) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com. * June 21, 1024.
Report,* June 24, 1182.
3R.* June 25, 1343.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 6) Bill
l. Com.* June 11, 5.
Report,* June 13, 214.
3R.* June 14, 380.
c. 1R.* June 17, 537.
2R.* June 25, 1388.
Memorandum Ordered, June 20, 886; June 21, 1051.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 7) Bill)
l. Report from Select Committee, June 20, 870.
Com. * June 24, 1182.
Report,* June 25, 1343.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 8) Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 5.
Com. * June 24, 1182.
Report,* June 25, 1343.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 9) Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 5.
Com. * June 24, 1182.
Report,* June 25, 1343.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 10) Bill
l. Com.* June 11, 5.
Report, June 13, 214.
c. 1R.* June 14, 403.
2R.* June 25, 1388.
Memorandum Ordered, June 20, 886; June 21, 1051.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 11) Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 5.
Com. * June 24, 1182.
Report,* June 25, 1343.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 12) Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 5.
Com.* June 24, 1182.
Report, June 25, 1343.
Electric Tramways
see Tramways.
Elland Gas Bill
l. 3R.* June 13, 213.
c. 1R.* June 14, 403.
Report from Select Committee, June 26, 1509.
Elliot, Mr. A. R. D. [Durham]
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 792.
Ellis, Mr. J. E. [Nottingham, Rushcliffe]
Business of the House, State of Government Business;System of Devolution, etc., June 11, 91.
Consolidated Fund Bill Procedure, June 25, 1432.
South African War;Refuge Camps
Condition of Camps;Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality, etc., June 17, 582, 595.
Number and Situation, etc., June 17, 540.
Emett, Mr. R.
Murder of, in Mexico
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 18, 711.
Emigration and Immigration
Aliens, see that title.
Ireland;Increase in Number of Emigrants, Legislation proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 297.
Emmott, Mr. A. [Oldham]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R. June 11, 139.
Endowed Educational Schemes
Transfer of Powers from Charity Commissioners to Board of Education;Draft Order in Council Presented, June 18, 685.
Enfield Small Arms Factory
Manufacture of New Rifles, Space required for, Expenditure, etc.
Os. Mr. Weir; Lord Stanley, June 24, 1333.
Enniscorthy
Post Office;Delay in commencing Buildings, etc.
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 727.
Esmonde, Sir T. G. [Wexford, N.]
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 862.
Enniscorthy Post Office, New;Delay in commencing Buildings, etc., June 18, 727.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 778; June 20, 977.
Intermediate Education, Ireland;New Rules, Teaching of the Irish Language, etc., June 21, 1168.
National Galleries of Scotland and Ireland, Expenditure on, Differential Treatment, etc., June 21, 1108.
Wexford County and District Surveyors, Increase of Salaries, etc., June 21, 1077.
Essendine Road Board School
Extension of;Opposition by Managers of Local Voluntary Schools, etc.
Q. Lord H. Cecil; A. Sir. J. Gorst, June 13, 278.
Estimates
Army and Navy Estimates, see those titles; also title. Supply.
"Euryalus," H.M.S.
Fire on
Q. Mr. R. Cavendish; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 11, 58.
Evans, Mr. S. T. [Glamorgan, Mid]
Coal Export Duty;Exemption of Contracts entered into before Budget Statement, June 25, 1395.
Finance Bill, Com., June 24 1274, 1282, 1285, 1298.
Welsh Mines, Inspectors of;Appointment of Welsh-speaking Inspector, etc., June 13, 275.
Evening Schools
see Education.
Evictions, Ireland
Number of Families evicted 1886&#x2013;1900, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 913.
Expiring Laws Continuance Bill
Ballot Act., etc, permanent Statutes, proposed
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 14, 429
Explosives
Coal Mines;Explosives to be added to Special List, Delay in issuing Order in Council
Q. Capt. Bagot; A. Mr. Ritchie June 13, 274.
F
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill
c. 2R., June 17, 629.
Petition, June 26, 1509.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill
Debate on Second Reading [Commons], June 11, 109; June 17, 630.
Accidents, Notice of, 121, 127, 141, 637, 652.
Bakehouse, Definition of "Underground," etc., 111, 131, 633,648,658.
Boilers, Periodical Inspection of;Definition of "Competent Person," etc., 130, 140, 666, 668, 671.
Dangerous Trades;
Prohibition of any Substance or Process;Home Office Powers, 125, 665.
Rules, Public Inquiry, etc., 112, 116, 125, 129, 139, 632, 649, 673, 674.
Dock Labourers, Extension of Bill to, proposed, 122, 142, 632, 642, 651, 661.
Fish Curing, Regulations, 115,121,131.
Fruit Preserving, Exemptions, 114, 121, 132, 141.
Government Contracts, Overtime etc., 121, 672.
Home-work and Domestic Workshops 115, 118, 140, 638, 660, 662, 664.
Kitchens of Hotels and Restaurants, Extension of Bill to, 658.
Laundries, 113, 126, 131, 140, 633, 653.
Religious, etc., Institutions, Laundries in;Inspection, 113, 119, 127, 133, 138, 141, 635, 644, 654, 674, 675.
Local Authorities, Powers of;Increased Powers under the Bill 117, 122, 123, 129, 130, 139, 638, 642, 663, 673.
Machinery;Cleaning beneath Moving Machinery Prohibited, 111, 668, 670.
Overtime, Reduction in, suggested, 122, 662.
Ventilation, 110, 631, 668, 670.
Factory and Workshop Acts Consolidation Bill
c. 2R., June 17, 676.
Factory and Workshops Acts Amendment (Expenses)
Resolution in Committee, June 21 1150.
Fair Wage Resolution
Army Contracts;Compliance with the Fair Wage Resolution
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Lord Stanley, June 24, 1197.
Blackie, Messrs. &amp; Co., Government contractors;Complaints from Dublin Bookbinders' Society
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Wyndham June 13, 293.
Falkirk and District Tramways Order Conarmation Bill
c. Lords Amendts.*, June 17, 537.
Famine
see India.
Farquharson, Dr. R. [Aberdeenshire, W.]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons propose June 13, 249.
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1529.
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill;Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1035.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 861, 862.
Militia;Disembodiment of Battalions serving at Home, June 21, 1058.
National Gallery Bill, Progress of, June 11, 65.
National Gallery, Scotland, Expenditure on;Loan Collection from South Kensington, etc., June 21, 1107, 1108.
Prison administration, Sootland;Imprisonment for Small Offences;Prison Doctors' Special Study;Abandoning Prison at Perth, etc., June 21, 1124, 1129.
Farrell, Mr. J. P. [Longford, N.]
Colonies;Reduction of Newspaper Postage proposed, June 25, 1411.
Faversham Water Bill
c. 2R.*, June 12, 145.
Report*, June 26, 1585.
Fenwick, Mr. C. [Northumberland, Wansbeck]
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1280, 1296; June 25, 1459, 1476.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com, June 12, 186, 201.
Ferguson, Mr. Munro [Leith Burghs]
Congested Districts Board Administration, Settling People on the Land, etc., June 21, 1144.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R., June 19, 826.
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1473.
Fergusson, Rt. Hon. Sir J. [Manchester, N.E.]
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 189.
Red Sea Lights, Construction of, etc., June 24, 1205.
Fermanagh
Barracks;Poisoned Tinned Meat, see Army;Meat.
Royal School Endowment;Students attending St. Macarten's Seminary, Case of Keenan, etc.
Q. Mr. Archdale; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 288.
Fermoy and Cork Direct Railway
Construction of;Commencement of Work Q. Mr. W. Abrahams; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1079.
Fertilizers and Feeding Stuffs Act
Board of Agriculture Report, June 21, 1025.
Feversham, Earl of
Drunkards' Bill, 3R., June 20, 874.
Licensing Bill, 3R., June 20, 879.
Field, Mr. W. [Dublin, St. Patrick]
Belfast
Revaluation Appeals;Assimilating Irish System to that of England, proposed, June 18, 727; June 25, 1419.
Riots;Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, June 14, 463.
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, 2R., June 18, 688, 690, 692.
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con., June 17, 533.
Commerce, Minister of;Appointment proposed, June 18, 731.
Commercial Intelligence Committee-Constitution and Terms of Reference, etc., June 21, 1063.
Customs Duties and Isle of Man;Rebates;Proposed Rebate in Ireland, June 14, 418.
Drainage Works, Ireland;Arterial Drainage, Government Assistance proposed, June 13, 296.
Dublin Industrial Schools, Establishment of, etc., June 13, 288.
Emigration, Ireland;Increase in Number of Emigrants, Legislation proposed, June 13, 297.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 775, 794; June 20, 1007.
Gambling in Grain, Prevention of;Co-operation with Germany, proposed, June 17, 558.
Forestry, Ireland
Action of Agricultural Department, Proposd Treasury Grant, etc., June 17, 568.
Department, Proposed Formation of, June 14, 427.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 395.
Maiden Lights, Improvement of, etc., June 20, 924.
Meat;Poisoned Tinned Meat at Fermanagh Barracks, June 17, 547.
Tonnage Dues;Regulations for Registration of Coasting and Cross Channel Steamers, June 17, 558; June 20, 904; June 25, 1402.
Finance Bill
c. Com. June 18, 756; June 20, 929; June 24, 1230; June 25, 1437.
Finance Bill
Dividing the Bill into two Bills;Instruction to Committee out of Order,
O. The Speaker, June 18, 755.
Petitions, June 21, 1051.
[For Details of Subjects discussed, see Sugar, Tea], &amp;c.
Fines, etc., Ireland
Abstract of Accounts Presented, June 13, 258; June 14, 382.
Finlay, Sir R. B.;Attorney General [Inverness Burghs]
Appeals, Return;House of Lords and Judicial Committee Appeals, June 24, 1201.
Colonial Acts Confirmation Bill, Intro., June 13, 330.
House of Lords and Privy Council Appeals;Number of Sittings in 1899 and 1900, June 20, 910.
First Commissioner of Works
Rt. Hon. A. Akers Douglas.
First Lord of the Admiralty
Earl Selborne.
First Lord of the Treasury
Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour.
Fish Culture
Buckland Fish Collection, see that title.
Fisher, Mr. Hayes;Lord of the Treasury [Fulham]
Fermoy and Cork Direct Railway, Commencement of Construction, June 21, 1079.
Post Office
Employees, Limiting Holiday on Queen Victoria's Birthday to certain Sections of, June 21, 1069.
Letters, House-to-House Delivery;Number of Letters delivered, etc., June 21, 1068.
London Telegraph Service;Clerks on Evening Duties, Meal Reliefs, June 21, 1069.
Mallaig Mails, Conveyance of, etc., June 21, 1067.
Savings Bank and Postal Order Business in Rural Post Offices, June 21, 1068
Fisheries
Ireland
Ballyvaughan Fishing Industry;Assisting Fishermen, etc.,
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 564.
Commissioners;Appointment of Mr. Lane
Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. Flynn, Mr. T. O'Donnell, Dr. Ambrose; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 565, Q Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 725; Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. Sheehan; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 918.
Inspector's Report for 1900;Date of Publication
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 565.
Mackerel Fishing Industry;Opening, Fresh Markets Abroad, Import duty in Russia, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 911.
Sea Fisheries, see that title.
Trawling, see that title.
Fitzgerald Estate
Receiver suing for Hanging Gale
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 20, 922.
Fitzmaurice, Lord E. [Wilts, Cricklade]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1526.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R., June 19, 827.
Turkey
Anatolian Railway, Papers relating to, June 24, 1203.
Railway Concessions to German Syndicate, etc., June 18, 708.
Tariff Charges in Asia Minor, Proposed increase in, June 24, 1203.
Flannery, Sir Fortescue [Yorkshire, Shipley]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 11, 129.
Navy
Boilers, Reboilering of Ships;Progress in Construction of H. M. H. "Cumberland," etc., June 25, 1396.
Estimates;Discussion on Clause 3, June 25, 1420.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 482.
Flavin, Mr. M. J. [Kerry, N]
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 4) (Ireland) Bill, 2R., June 11, 39.
United Irish League Meetings and Action of Police, June 11, 67.
Fletcher, Sir H. [Sussex, Lewes]
South Metropolitan Gas Bill, 3R., June 11, 15.
Flint
Telephone Exchange, Delay in Establishing
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1215.
Flower, Mr. E. F. S. [Bradford, W.]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1524.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 929, 960.
Flynn, Mr. J. C. [Cork, N.]
Civil Servants;Boy Copyists;Number admitted since 1898, etc., June 17, 562.
Constabulary, Royal Irish, Grievances;Report of Inquiry, June 14, 428.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 797.
Fisheries, Ireland, Commissioners;Appointment of Mr. Lane, June 17, 566.
Intermediate Education Programme Attaching Marks to Honour Subjects, June 17, 565.
Percentage of Junior Grade Students passing Senior Grade, June 21, 1072.
Police, Cost of, in England and Scotland;Return, June 13, 300.
South African War
Farm Burning, Action of Gen. Bundle;Blowing up Mills, etc., June 13, 262.
Refuge Camps;Mortality Statistics, etc., June 20, 887, 889.
Walsall School;Exemptions from Attendance, Powers of School Board, etc., June 20, 908.
Food and Drugs Act
Prosecutions under, see Adulteration of Food and Drugs.
Food Preservatives
Report of Departmental Committee
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. Long, June 18, 715.
Foodstuffs
Gambling in Grain, Prevention of;Co-operation with Germany proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 17, 558.
Foreign Office
Secretary of State;Marquess of Lansdowne.
Under-Secretary;Visc. Cranborne.
Forestry
Ireland, see that title;Afforesting, etc.
Foster, Dr.
Inspector of Mines, see Wales;Mines.
oster, Sir Walter [Derby, Ilkeston]
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 860, 862; June 26, 1576.
"Mongolian," Transport to South Africa;Registered Accommodation for Troops, etc., June 14, 411.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 855.
Post Office;Phthisis, Deaths from, Return proposed, June 18, 718, 719.
South African War;Typhoid Fever, Deaths among the Troops, Number of Cases, etc., June 25, 1393.
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir H. H. [Wolverhampton, E.]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons proposed, June 13, 242.
Consolidated Fund Bill;Discussions in Com. of Ways and Means, Procedure, June 25, 1430.
France
Diplomatic and Consular Services;Annual Cost of Service
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 20, 899.
Money Orders;Charges for English and French Money Orders compared
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1216.
Morocco;Extension of French Influence
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 11, 59.
Old Age Pension Bill;Laying Copy on the Table of the British Parliament
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 18, 731.
Trade Reports Presented, June 11, 6; June 13, 214.
Frankfort de Montmorency, Visc.
Army Reform and Reorganisation, Government Proposals;Inadequate Terms offered to Recruits, etc., June 25, 1373.
Freshwater, Yarmouth and Newport Railway Bill
l. Report* June 14, 377.
3R.* June 25, 1335.
Fruit
Ulster;Railways and Fruit Carriage, Complaints against Great Northern Railway Company, etc.
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 724.
Fruit Duty
Apricot Pulp, Canned Apricots, etc.
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Sir M. H. Beach; June 14, 417.
Fruit Preserving Industry
Factory and Workshops Act
O. Mr. Talbot, June 11, 141.
G
Galloway, Mr. W. J. [Manchester, S.W.]
Army Deserters, Treatment of;Hussars marched handcuffed through streets, June 13, 267.
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1534.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R., June 14, 818, 819, 829.
Local Government Provisional Order (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 391.
Gambling in Grain
Prevention of;Co-operation with Germany, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 17, 558.
Gas Orders Confirmation Bill
l. Com. * June 11, 5
Report* June 13, 214
3R.* June 14, 380
c. 1R.* June 17, 537
2R.* June 26, 1509
Memorandum Presented, June 26, 1511.
Gas and Water Orders Confirmation Bill
l. Com. * June 11, 5
3R.* June 13, 214
c. 1R.* June 14, 403
2R.* June 25, 1388
Memorandum Presented, June 26, 1511.
Germany
China, see that title.
Diplomatic and Consular Services;Annual Cost of Service
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 20, 899.
Trade Report Presented, June 17, 511.
Gibbs, Mr. A. [City of London]
Jamaica;Government Inscribed Stock, Treasury Conditions under Colonial Stock Act, 1900, June 11, 61.
Gibraltar
Coal Duty;Exemption from Duty of Coal exported to Gibraltar, proposed,
Q. Mr. E. Robertson; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 24, 1205.
Harbour Works Scheme
Committee's Report
Os. Vis. Sidmouth, June 17, 526.
Laying on the Table, etc,
Q. Mr. Labouchere; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 17, 553.
Cost of Completing Works
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. A. M. Pretyman, June 18, 706.
Purchase of Spanish Territory
Q. Mr. J. O'Kelly; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 17, 554.
Rawson's, Adm., Letters, Laying on the Table with Report of Committee
Qs. Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour June 20, 900; June 25, 1419.
Letters Presented, June 24, 1184, 1194.
Suspension of Works on the Western Side of the Rock, etc.
Motion (Mr. G. Bowles), June 13, 301.
Gilhooly, Mr. J. [Cork Co., W.]
Baltimore Postal Delivery, Improvement of, June 11, 68; June 24, 1220.
Navy
Meat Contracts;Channel Squadron at Berehaven, Alleged Foreign Mea Supplies, June 20, 897.
Religious Ministrations to Dying Seamen;Case on H.M.S. "Diadem," June 20, 896; June 24, 1198.
Gladstone, Rt. Hon. H. J. [Leeds, W.]
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 395.
Glasgow
Duke Street Prison;Inadequate Hospital Accommodation, etc.
Electric Tram Accidents in 1901, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 14, 425.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1116, 1128.
Tram Horses, Sale of;Purchase for Army Remounts, etc., proposed
Q. Capt. Morton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1055.
Glasgow Corporation (Police) Provisional Order Confirmation Bill
l. 2R.* June 25, 1337.
Glasgow and South-Western Railway Bill
l. 2R.* June 24, 1174.
Glengariff National School Teacher
Delay in Payment of Grant for Teaching Irish
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 569.
Glucose
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposals
Finance Bill Debate, June 20, 1008; June 24, 1255.
Goddard, Mr. D. F. [Ipswich]
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Design, etc, June 14, 498.
Golborne Gas Bill
c. 1R.* June 11, 6.
Gordon, Mr. J. E. [Elgin and Nairn]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons, proposed, June 13, 235.
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir J. E.;Vice-President of the Board of Education [Cambridge University]
Board of Education, Technological Work, Report of Committee, June 13, 278.
Buckland Fish Collection;Transference to Grimsby, proposed, June 20, 910.
Child Labour, Employment of Children of School Age;Inter-departmental Inquiry, June 18, 720.
Education Bill
Wales
County Schools;Section 6, Proposed Exemption, etc., June 20, 907.
Technological Instruction;Proposed Clause, June 20, 908.
Essendine Road Board School, Extension of;Opposition by Manager of Local Voluntary Schools, etc., June 13, 279.
Evening Continuation Classes;Position of such Bodies as the Polytechnic, etc., in the event of the Educational Bill becoming law, June 25, 1413.
Evening School Code for 1901;Date of Issue, June 13, 280.
Higher Elementary Education;Cockerton Judgment, etc.
Leeds School Board Letter, etc., June 20, 909.
School Boards arranging with Municipal Authorities for the Continuation of Evening School work;Funds at the Disposal of Local Authorities, etc., June 21, 1070; June 24, 1214; June 25, 1413.
Pupil Teachers;King's Scholarship Examination, Number of Teachers from Country Schools Examined in 1900, etc., June 18, 719.
Teachers
Dismissal of;Right of Appeal, Date of Introducing Bill, June 17, 563.
Registration of, June 21, 1070.
Voluntary Schools, Rate Aid for;Round Table Conference in London, June 13, 279.
Wales
County Schools and Urban District Authorities, June 24, 1215.
Intermediate Schools;Urban District Council's Share in Control of, etc., June 21, 1071.
Llanelly and Education Question Proposed Temporary Bill, June 20, 907.
Walsall School, Exemption from Attendance, Powers of School Board, etc., June 20, 908.
Gosford, Earl of
Representative Peer for Ireland, June 11, 1; June 18, 681; June 20, 869.
Goulding, Mr. E. A. [Wilts, Devizes]
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 852.
Government Contracts
Army, see that title.
Fair Wage Clause;Complaints against Messrs. Blackie and Co. by Dublin Bookbinders' Society
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 293.
Government Offices
Architects, Death of;Carrying out Designs of Mr. Young and Mr. Brydon Q. Mr. Whitmore; A. Mr. Douglas, June 14, 426.
Grain
Gambling in Grain, see that title.
Grant, Mr. Corrie [Warwickshire, Rugby]
Cremation Bill, Con., June 26, 1558, 1559.
Great Eastern Railway Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 18, 682.
Report,* June 24, 1174.
Great Northern Railway Bill
l. 3R.* June 13, 214.
c. Lords' Amendts.* June 18, 696.
Great Northern Railway Company, Ireland
Ulster, Fruit Carriage in;Complaints
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 724.
Great Western Railway Bill
c. Report* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
l. 1R.* June 24, 1180.
Greene, Mr. H. D. [Shrewsbury]
Calcutta, Bishop of;Status, Conferring Style and Precedence of Archbishop proposed, June 13, 271.
Greenwich Hospital and Travers Foundation.
Statement of Accounts Presented, June 11, 51; June 13, 215.
Gretton, Mr. J. [Derbyshire, S.]
China;Shanghai
French Settlement, Acquisition of Tract of Land by the French beyond Limit laid down by Anglo-French Agreement, June 25, 1399.
German Garrison, Retention, etc. June 13, 270.
Grey, Sir E. [Northumberland, Berwick]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1455, 1467.
Griffith, Mr. E. J. [Anglesey]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1519.
Grimsby
Buckland Fish Collection;Proposed transference to Grimsby
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 909.
Grocers' Licences (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, June 19, 814.
Groves, Mr. T. G. [Salford, S.]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1531.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 1019.
Guernsey Militia
Reorganisation;Government Proposals
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 55.
Guilfoile, C.
Soldiers' Liability for Parents' Maintenance
Q. Mr. Delany; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 893.
Gully, Rt. Hon. W. C
see Speaker.
Gurdon, Sir Brampton [Norfolk, N.]
Business of the House;Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister Bill, etc., June 11, 95.
H
Habitual Drunkards
Petition for Alteration of Law, June 12, 147.
Habitual Drunkards' Bill
see Drunkards' Bill.
Haldane, Mr. R. B. [Haddington]
Education, Scotland;Training Colleges, Mr. Carnegie's Gift, etc., June 21, 1090.
South African War;Refuge Camps, Condition of Camps, Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality among, etc., June 17, 604.
Haliburton, Lord
Army Reform and Reorganisation, Government Proposals;Inadequate Terms offered to Recruits, etc., June 25, 1370.
Halsbury, Earl of;Lord Chancellor
Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) Bill, 2R., June 20, 880.
Workmen's Compensation Appeals Excluded from the House of Lords, June 24, 1186.
Halsey, Mr. T. F. [Herts, Watford]
Workmen's Trains;Inadequate Facilities, June 13, 340.
Hamburg
Trade Report Presented, June 17, 511.
Hamilton, Rt. Hon. Lord George;Secretary of State for India [Middlesex, Ealing]
Banking and Commerce;Sale of Bills and Telegraphic Transfers, Difference in Rates, Reduction in Impost proposed, June 17, 551.
Boer Prisoners, Internment in India;Un-healthiness of Situation, June 13, 261; June 20, 891; June 21, 1052.
Calcutta, Bishop of;Status, Confening Style and Precedence of Archbishop, Proposed, June 13, 271; June 20, 899.
China
British Garrison;Composition of Permanent Garrison, June 17, 551.
Tientsin;French and Indian Troops, Disturbance between, June 13, 269.
Famine Commission Report, June 11, 59.
Finance;Explanatory Memorandum June 24, 1202.
Frontier Province, Administration of, etc.;Laying Papers and Map on the Table, June 13, 271.
Railway Materials, Placing Contracts with Foreign Firms;Messrs. Krupp and Co., June 18, 707.
Hamilton Burgh Provisional Order Bill
c. 3R.* June 11, 47.
Hammond, Mr. J. [Carlow]
Barrow Drainage Scheme;Facilities for Discussion, June 11, 101.
Volunteers in South Africa;Mounted Infantry, Members serving as, Rate of Pay, June 13, 267.
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. R. W.;President of the Board of Agriculture [Preston]
Agricultural Instruction;Transferring Duties of Board of Agriculture to Board of Education, June 24, 1213.
Animals;Public Drinking Places for, Providing with Stand Pipe and Tap, June 14, 423.
Butter Adulteration;Fixing Standard of Water, case of T. Simons, etc., June 17, 561.
Contagious Diseases, Animals;Compulsory Slaughter, Higher Compensation proposed, June 14, 423.
Inspection of Schools;Applications for Inspection, Number of, etc., June 24, 1214.
Meteorological Reports;Daily Publication at Sub-post Offices in Agricultural Districts, June 17, 560.
Milk Standard, Fixing;Report of Departmental Committee, June 14, 422.
Handsworth Urban District Council Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir William [Monmouthshire, W.]
Beer Bill, Facilities for passing;Report of Committee of Experts, etc., June 11, 91.
Civil List Bill, 3R., June 18, 741, 743.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 942.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 181, 183, 186.
Youthful Offenders Bill, Intro. June 20, 928.
Hardie, Mr. Keir [Merthyr Tydvil]
Brechin Labour Dispute;Case of J. Bean, Proposed Remission of Sentence, June 13, 285, 286.
Civil List Bill, 3R., June 18, 744.
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1473.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill 2R., June 14, 392.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 188.
Hardwicke, Earl of; Under Secretary of State for India
Bengal Railways;Inadequate Engineering Works, June 13, 227.
Hardy, Mr. L. [Kent, Ashford]
South-Eastern and London, Chatham, and Dover Railway Bill, 2R., June 11, 28.
Harpenden District Gas Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. 1R.* June 13, 255.
Harris, Mr. F. L. [Tynemouth]
Diplomatic and Consular Service;Retired Naval and Military Officers holding appointments without passing Examination in Foreign Languages, June 18, 710.
Harrogate Corporation Bill
l. Report,* June 17, 510.
c. 1R.* June 24, 1193.
Harrogate Water Bill
l. Report from Select Committee,* June 17, 510.
3R.* June 21, 1023.
c. 1R. * June 24, 1192.
Harrow-on-the-Hill
Polling Districts, Division into;Order Presented, June 20, 874, 885.
Harwich Harbour
Abstract of Accounts, Receipts and Expenditure, Presented, June 17, 512, 538.
Harwood, Mr. G. [Bolton]
Bolton Postmen's Grievances, June 25, 1407.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 667.
Haulbowline Dockyard
Dry Docks;Construction of Second Dock proposed
Q. Capt. Donelan; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 17, 550.
Haviland-Burke, Mr. [King's Co., Tullamore]
Belfast Riots;Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, June 14, 454.
Hawkesbury, Lord
Leeds Corporation Water Bill;Locus standi Question, June 24, 1176.
Hay, Mr. C. G. [Shoreditch, Hoxton]
London Telegraph Clerks, Evening Duties;Meal Reliefs, June 21, 1069.
Post Office Employees, Limiting Holiday on Queen Victoria's Birthday to certain Sections of, June 21, 1068.
South-Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railway Bill, 2R., June 11, 25.
Hayne, Rt. Hon. C. Seale [Devon, Ashburton]
Newton Abbott Postmen's Petition, June 25, 1408.
Hearts of Oak Benefit Society
Old Age Pensions;Resolution
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 20, 926.
Heaton, Mr. J. Henniker [Canterbury]
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 947.
Mandat Carte Post Office System, Introduction of, proposed, June 24, 1216.
Money Orders
Charges for English and French Money Orders compared, June 24, 1216.
Telegraphic Money Orders;Introduction of Indian System into United Kingdom, June 24, 1217.
Parcels Post to Buenos Ayres;Stamp Duty on Parcels, Right of Imposing Fiscal Charge, June 24, 1215.
Postage Stamps;Design and Colour of New Stamps, Approval of, etc., June 24, 1218.
Postal Orders;Salonika Post Office refusing to Supply, June 25, 1407.
Spion Kop, Survey of;laying before Parliament, proposed, June 14, 411.
Hemphill, Rt. Hon. C. H. [Tyrone, N.]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1531.
China;Yang-tsze Valley, British Interests;Anglo-German Agreement, June 18, 710.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 26, 1578.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 795.
Heneage, Lord
Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) Bill;Workmen's Compensation Appeals excluded from House of Lords, June 24, 1185.
Hereditary Revenues of the Crown
see Civil List Bill;Crown Lands
Heywood and Middleton Water Board Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. 1R.* June 13, 255.
2R.* June 24, 1191.
Hickman, Sir A. [Wolverhampton, W.]
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 171.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 203.
Hickson, Mr.
Appointment as Resident Magistrate
Q. Mr. Archdale; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 725.
Higher Elementary Education
see Education.
Highlands and Islands of Scotland
Mail Packet Service, see title Stornoway.
Medical Officers of Health, appointment of, without Public Health Diplomas
Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 14, 425.
Schools, Exemptions;Removal of Names of exempted Children from Attendance Register, Effect on Grants, etc.
Os. Mr. Weir, June 19, 834; Mr. Murray, 846.
see also Little Cottars and Crofters.
Hobhouse, Mr. C. E. H. [Bristol, E.]
Business of the House;Supply, June 25 1421.
China;Tientsin, French and Indian Troops, Disturbances, June 13, 269.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 1020.
Jubaland Expedition;Total Cost, etc., June 13, 272.
War Office Decentralisation Committee of 1898;Recommendations, June 17, 545.
Hobhouse. Mr. H. [Somerset, E.]
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 183.
Holland, W. H. [York, W. R., Rotherham]
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 953.
Home Office
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. C. T. Ritchie.
Under Secretary;Rt. Hon. Jesse Collings.
Hope, Mr. J. Fitzalan [Sheffield, Brightside]
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 189.
Horley District Gas Bill
l. Report,* June 17, 510.
3R.* June 20, 871.
Horses
Army
Remounts;Purchase of Tramway Horses proposed
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1055.
South African War, see that title.
Hospitals (Exemption from Rates) Bill
Petition, June 11, 49; June 13, 256.
Hoult, Mr. J. [Cheshire, Wirrall]
Royal Yacht, Designer of, superintending Naval Shipbuilding;Additional Supervision, etc., June 25, 1394.
House of Lords
Judicial Business
Return Ordered, June 24, 1195.
Qs. Mr. Blake; As. Sir R. Finlay, June 20, 910; June 24, 1201.
Workmen's Compensation Act, Exclusion of Appeals from House of Lords.
Os. Lord Heneage, Lord Halsbury, June 24, 1185, 1186.
Housing of the Working Classes
Re-housing
Joint Committee of Lords and Commons of Inquiry,
Resolution (Mr. Ritchie), June 11, 144.
South Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railway Co.
O. Mr. Hay, June 11, 26.
Housing of the Working Classes (Repayment of Loans) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 49; June 24, 1193; June 26, 1509.
Howard de Walden, Lord
Sat first in Parliament after the death of his father, June 11, 1.
Hull, Barnsley, and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Bill
l. Report,* June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1336.
Humber Commercial Railway and Dock Bill
c. 3R.* June 13, 251
l. 1R.* June 14, 379.
2R.* June 24, 1174.
I
Ilkeston and Heanor Water Board Bill
l. 2R.* June 13, 213.
Immigration
see Emigration and Immigration.
Imperial Court of Appeal
Crown Colonies Representatives
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 24, 1201.
Establishment of
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 17, 552.
Imperialism
"Spread-Eagle" Imperialism
O. Mr. J. Burns, June 13, 364.
Import Duties
Isle of Man, Rebates in;Proposed Rebate for Ireland
Qs. Mr. Field, Mr. Flynn; As. Sir M. H. Beach, June 14, 418.
Tea and Sugar Duties, Preferential Treatment of the Colonies
Debate on the Finance Bill, June 18, 765; June 20, 929.
Inclosure (Sutton) Provisional Order Bill
c. Report* June 18, 698.
3R.* June 19, 813.
l. 1R.* June 20, 872.
Income Tax
Assessments 1896&#x2013;1900, Number of, etc.;Return Ordered, June 20, 886.
British Investments Abroad;Amount of Income Tax charged
Q. Mr. C. M'Arthur; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 13, 272.
Crown, Payment by
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 18, 713.
Exemption of fines on Demise of Land, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Crae; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 17, 555.
India
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. Lord G. Hamilton.
Under Secretary;Earl of Hardwicke.
Army
King's Royal Rifles, Second Battalion returned from Ladysmith;Refunding Outfit Expenses, etc.
Q. Mr. Mansfield; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 703.
Reliefs;Number of Men in India awaiting Reliefs
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Mr. Brodrick June 25, 1393.
Banking and Commerce;Sale of Bills and Telegraphic Transfers, Difference in Rates, Reduction in Impost, proposed
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 17, 551.
Bengal, see that title.
Boer Prisoners, see South African War;Prisoners
Calcutta, Bishop of;Status, Conferring Style and Precedence of Archbishop, proposed
Q. Mr. H. D. Greene; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 13, 271.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 20, 898.
Engineering Works;Inadequate Works Os. Lord Stanley of Alderley, June 13, 219, 229; Earl of Hardwicke, 227, 229.
Famine Commission Report
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 11, 59.
Finance
Explanatory Memorandum
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 24, 1201.
Loans raised in India, etc.;Return presented, June 20, 873, 885.
Frontier Province (New), Administratio of, etc.;Laying Papers and Map o the Table
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 13, 271.
Money Orders;Telegraphic System, Working of
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1217.
Moral and Material Progress and Condition, 1899&#x2013;1900;Statement Presented, June 12, 148; June 13, 215.
Public Works Department;Inadequate Engineering Works
Us. Lord Stanley of Alderley, June 13, 219, 229; Earl of Hardwicke, 227, 229.
Railway Materials;Placing Contracts with Foreign Firms, Messrs. Krupp and Co.
Q. Sir C. Cayzer; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 18, 707.
Railways;Bengal, see that title.
Industrial Schools
see Reformatories and Industrial Schools.
Industrial Schools Acts Amendment Bill
Petition, June 11, 49.
Inebriate Reformatories
Scotland;Provision for carrying out of the Act
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1120, 1129.
State Inebriate Reformatories;Regulation for Management, etc., Presented, June 24, 1184, 1194.
Infants
Bodies of deceased infants, Disposal of Legislation, proposed
Q. Sir J. Kennaway; A. Mr. Long, June 11, 60.
Intermediate Education (Ireland)
see Education;Ireland.
Intermediate Education (Wales)
see Education;Wales.
Invergarry and Fort Augustus Railway Order Confirmation Bill
c. Ordered, June 24, 1191.
Investments
British Investments abroad;Amount of Income Tax charged
Q. Mr. C. M'Arthur; A. Sir M. Hicks-Beach, June 13, 272.
Ireland
Lord Lieutenant;Earl Cadogan.
Chief Secretary;Rt. Hon. G. Wyndham.
Attorney General;Rt. Hon. J. Atkinson.
Solicitor General;Mr. D. P. Barton.
Lord Chancellor;Lord Ashbourne.
Achill Postal Arrangements, Sunday Delivery of Letters
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1219.
Afforesting
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Department, Action of;Proposed Treasury Grant, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 568.
County Councils Powers
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1072.
Forestry Department, Proposed Formation of
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 427.
Ahinah, Labourers' Cottages at;Rejection of J. Desmond's Application
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 427.
Army Contracts, see Army.
Army Recruiting Statistics
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 415; Qs. Mr. O'Shee; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 894.
Arran, Island of;Proposed Signal Station Q. Mr. Morris; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 898.
Ballinfull Post Office, Establishment of, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Ballintogher, see that title.
Ballyvaughan Fishing Industry;Assisting Fishermen, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 564.
Baltimore Postal Delivery, Improvement of,
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 68.
Barrack Stores for Troops in Ireland, see Army Contracts.
Barrow Drainage Question
Os. Mr. Delany; Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 99, 100.
Bawnboy Rural District, Congestion in;Scheduling as Congested District
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 918.
Bawnboy Union Hospital Trained Nurse, Salary;Recoupment under the Local Taxation Account
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1417.
Beer Contracts for Troops in Ireland, Withdrawing from Irish Firms;Resolution of Irish Trades Congress
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 547.
Belfast, see that title.
Blackie, Messrs. and Co., Government Constractors;Fair Wages Resolution, Complaints from Dublin Bookbinders' Society, etc.,
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 293.
Bracklinn National School Teacher;Salary, Payment for teaching Irish, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 293.
Bradshaw, Rev. Nevin, Assault on, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Johnston; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1078.
Budget Proposals, Irish Taxation Grievance;Finance Bill Debate, June 18, 770, 803; June 20, 977; June 24, 1242.
Butter;Prices in Statistics for 1900, Prices of Creamery Butter, etc
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. Wyndham June 13, 289.
Cahirciveen Postal Service to Waterville, Improvement of
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. A Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Cavan, see that title
Census Returns;Date of Issue, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 429.
Clare, South and West Clare Railways;Taxing Electoral Divisions of Dromane, etc., Proposed Remission
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 917.
Clones Post Office;Free Medical Attendance for Officials
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A Chamberlain, June 20, 923.
Constabulary, Royal Irish, see that title,
Cork, see that title.
County Councils and Public Works;Increasing Powers of County Councils, proposed
Q. Mr. M'Govem; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 428.
County Officers and Courts;Account of Receipts and Payments, presented, June 20, 874, 885.
County and District Surveyors, Increase in Salary by Local Government Board, see title Wexford.
Cremations;Extension of Cremation Bill to Ireland, see Cremation Bill.
Customs Duties;Rebates in Isle of Man, Proposed Rebate for Ireland.
Qs. Mr. Field, Mr. Flynn; As. Sir M. H. Beach, June 14, 418.
Dairy Industry, Protection of;Foreign Products sold in England as Irish Products, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 917.
Dingle Bay, Trawling in;Prosecutions, Proposed Alteration of Law
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 568.
Direct Labour, Employment of on Roads, see title Roads.
Distillation, Illicit, Seizures in Scotland and Ireland;Return.
Qs. Mr. O'Mara, Mr. J. Redmond, Mr. Lough; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1410.
Dogs Regulation (Ireland) Act, 1855;Accounts Presented, June 13, 258; June 14, 382.
Drainage Works;Arterial Drainage, Government Assistance, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 296.
Dromore, Insanitary Condition of Tenement Houses
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1417.
Dublin, see that title.
Dungourney and Mogeely;United Irish League Meetings, Actions of the Police
Qs. Capt. Donelan, Mr. Power, Mr. Flavin; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 11, 66.
Education, for collective heading see Education;Ireland.
Emigration, Increase of;Legislation, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 297.
Enniscorthy Post Office;Delay in commencing new buildings, etc.
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 727.
Evictions;Number of Families Evicted 1886&#x2013;1900, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 913.
Fermanagh Barracks, Poisoned Tinned Meat, see Army;Meat.
Fermanagh Royal School Endowments;Students attending St. Macarten's Seminary, etc.
Q. Mr. Archdale; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 288.
Financial Relations between Ireland and Great Britain;Budget Proposals and Irish Taxation Grievance, see sub-heading Budget Proposals
Fines, etc.;Abstract of Accounts Presented, June 13, 258; June 14, 382.
Fisheries, for collective heading, see that title.
Fitzgerald Estate;Receiver sueing for Hanging Gale
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 20, 922.
Gas Workers' Strike in Cork, see title Cork.
Glengariff National School Teacher;Delay in Payment of Grant for teaching Irish
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 569.
Government Contracts and Fair Wage Resolution, see title Fair Wage Resolution.
Haulbowline Dockyard;Construction of second dry Dock, proposed
Q. Capt. Donelan; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 17, 550.
Heather burning, see sub-heading Malicious Burning.
Hickson, Mr., Appointment as Resident Magistrate
Q. Mr. Archdale; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 725.
Industrial Schools, for collective heading, see title Reformatories and Industrial Schools.
Intermediate Education, see Education;Ireland.
Inventors consulting American Patent Specifications;Completing East Wing of National Library
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 287.
Jones's J. C, Estate, Co. Cavan;Sale of Land to Tenants
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 295.
Kenmare River Lights;Erection of Light on Sherky Island, proposed
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 288.
Killaglin Railway;Increase in Baronial Guarantee
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1221.
Killarney, see that title
Killcloony Property;Sale of Grass Farms to Tenants, proposed
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 290.
Land Judge's Court, for collective heading, see that title, also Names of Estates.
Land Purchase
Number of Tenant Purchasers under various Acts
Q. Mr. T. W. Russell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1413.
(For particular Estates, see their Names.)
Lights and Lighthouses, for collective heading see that title.
Limerick, see that title.
Lisburn Disturbances;Mr. Trew's Speeches, Prosecution, proposed
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 914.
Local Government Provisional Order Bill;Putting in force from Sept, 30th, proposed
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 570.
Loughrea, see sub-heading Malicious Burning.
Mackerel Fishing Industry;Opening Fresh Markets abroad, Import Duty in Russia, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 30, 911.
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace, for collective heading, see that title.
Maiden Lights, Improvement of, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 20, 924.
Malicious Burning of Heather
Crown proceedings, Sligo
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 24, 1225.
Loughrea, Application for Compensation, etc.
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 24, 1225.
Mallaranny;Prosecutions for Cattle Trespassing, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 567.
Marlborough Street Training College, see title Dublin.
Mayo Co., Police Force;Number of Police, 1895&#x2013;1900, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 912.
Meat for the Navy and Army, see titles Army and Navy.
Militia, see that title.
Moystown Arson Case;Holding Special Court
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 13, 292.
Mullough Police Officers;Discharge of
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 294.
National Library, Offer of American Patent Specifications;Completing East Wing of Library
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 287.
National School Teachers, see that title.
Navan Mail Service;Delays
Q. Mr. P. White; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 296.
Ogilby Estate;Delay in Sale of Land to Tenants
Q. Mr. T. W. Russell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 289.
Parliamentary Time, Distribution of;Irish Interests ignored and neglected, alleged
Debate, June 11, 82.
Pauper Children, Classifying Children under two years of age as sick, etc.
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 294.
Paupers, Cost of Maintenance;Difference of Cost in various Unions
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1416.
Police Protection in Sligo;Case of Mr. Phibbs
Qs. Mr. O'Dowd, Col. M'Calmont, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1414.
Poor Rate Collectors in Cork;Method of making Lodgments, Allocation of Interests, etc.
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 916.
Post Office, for Collective Heading, see that title.
Postmen;Pay, Percentage of established Postmen, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Potato Spraying;Names, Qualifications, etc., of Instructors
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 565.
Proselytizing;Charge against Dr. Long, see title Limerick.
Public Accounts, Auditing in Dublin, proposed
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A, Chamberlain, June 20, 923.
Public Works, Carrying out;Increasing Powers of County Councils, proposed
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 428.
Railways, for Collective Heading, see that title.
Rating Valuation Appeals;Assimilating Irish System to that of England, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 727.
Reeves' Estate, Skibbereen, Sale of Tenants' Interests
Q. Mr. E. Barry; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1224.
Reformatories, see that title.
Representative Peers, see that title.
Rifle Clubs;Supplying Clubs with Government Rifles and Ammunition
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 414.
Roads, for collective heading, see that title.
Secondary and Technical Education, see title Education, sub-heading Ireland;Intermediate Education.
Shanballymore;Police tearing down Notice of United Irish League Meeting, alleged
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 915.
Sharkey, Sergeant, Case of
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1074.
Sligo, see that title.
Swanlinbar Petty Sessions;Attendance of Resident Magistrate, etc.
Q. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1075.
Tawin Water Supply;Absence of Fresh Water
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 567.
Templemore;Unsatisfactory Water Supply, Delay in effecting New Scheme
Q. Mr. K. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1073.
Trawling, see that title
Tullamore Quarter Sessions, see title Tullamore.
Ulster, see that title.
United Irish League
Camp, Co. Kerry;Constable taking names of enrolling Members
Qs. Mr. Th. O'Donnell, Capt. Donelan; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 292.
Dungourney and Mogeely Meetings;Action of Police
Qs. Capt. Donelan, Mr. Power, Mr. Flavin; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 11, 66.
Shanballymore;Police tearing down Notice of Meeting, alleged
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 915.
University Education
Commission;Names of Members, Terms of Reference
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 298.
Q. Mr. Morris; A. Mr. A J. Balfour, June 20, 925.
Place of Meeting, Appointment of Secretary, etc.
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 21, 1079.
Printing Evidence in Ireland
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 25, 1421.
Roman Catholic University;Petitions, June 11, 49; June 13, 256; June 21, 1051.
Valuation for Rating Purposes;Belfast, see that sub-heading.
Volunteers, Drilling with the Regulars at Dublin Barracks;Expenses, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 414.
Walsh, Mr. P. T., Appointment of, as Justice of the Peace;Associated with the United Irish League, etc.
Qs. Mr. W. Johnston, Mr. P. J. Power; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1075.
Westport, see that title.
Wexford County and District Surveyors, Increase of Salaries;Report of Inquiries, etc.
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1077.
Workhouses;for collective heading, see that title.
Yeomanry, Imperial, New Regiments, Allocation of, to Ireland, Suggestion
Q. Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1393.
Irish Language
Teaching in Irish Schools, etc.
Intermediate Education Rules Debate, June 21, 1152.
National School Teachers' Pay, etc.
see National School Teachers.
Irish Presbyterian Church Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Report,* June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1336.
Irish Trade Congress
Workmen's Compensation Act Resolution
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 24, 1226.
Iron Ore
Wales, Amount imported into South Wales in 1900;Notification from Spanish Government Government, etc.
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 13, 278.
Isle of Man
Customs Rebates;Proposed Extension to Ireland
Q. Mr. Field; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 14, 418.
Isle of Thanet Light Railways
Amendment Order Presented, June 14, 381, 405.
Isolation Hospitals Bill
c. Con.* June 17, 676.
l. 1R.* June 18, 686.
Italy
Coal Contracts with Great Britain;Effect of new Export Duty, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 20, 901.
J
Jackson, Rt. Hon. W. L. [Leeds, N.]
Higher Grade Schools, Cockerton Judgment;Leeds School Board Letter, etc., June 20, 908.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 855.
Jamaica
Government Inscribed Stock;Treasury Conditions under Colonial Stock Act, 1900
Q. Mr. A. Gibbs; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 61.
Jeffreys, Mr. A. F. [Hants, N.]
Bournemouth Corporation Bill;Instruction to Committee, June 14, 387.
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con., June 17, 530.
Jessel, Capt. H. M. [St. Pancras, S.]
National Gallery (Purchase of Adjacent Land) Bill, 2R., June 17, 677.
Johnston, Mr. W. [Belfast, S.]
Bradshaw, Rev. Nevin, Assault on, June 21, 1078.
Limerick Disturbances;Case of Dr. Long, June 18, 721.
Roman Catholicism, Royal Declaration against;Committee, Names of Members, etc., June 13, 299.
Walsh's, Mr. P. T., Appointment as J.P., etc., June 21, 1075.
Johnstone, Mr. J. Heywood [Sussex, Horsham]
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 866.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 858.
Joicey, Sir J. [Durham, Chester-le-Street]
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1278, 1297, 1313; June 25, 1460, 1488.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 184, 188, 203.
"Victoria and Albert" New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 489, 496, 500, 501, 502.
Jones, Mr. D. B. [Swansea District]
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1272, 1289; June 25, 1444, 1456.
Jones J. C., Estate
Sale of Land to Tenants
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 295.
Jordan, Mr. J. [Fermanagh, S.]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1530.
Cremation Bill, Con. June 19, 863; June 26, 1553.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 774; June 20, 977, 999; June 24, 1253.
Marlborough Street Training College;Appointment of Principal, June 21, 1073.
Joyce, Mr. M. [Limerick]
"South Esk," Provisions on;Complaints of Crew, etc., June 25, 1400.
Jubaland Expedition
Total Cost, etc.
Q. Mr. C. Hobhouse; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 13, 272.
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
see Privy Council.
Judicial Statistics
Scotland;Returns from Sasine Office, Alleged Omission
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 18, 720.
Jurors' Expenses Bill
Petitions, June 24, 1193.
Justices' Jurisdiction (London) Bill
l. 1R., June 17, 512.
2R. June 25, 1345.
Juvenile Offenders
Treatment of;Scotland
Reference to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1120, 1128.
K
Kearley, Mr. H. E. [Devonport]
Finance Bill, Com. June 18, 756, 760, 791; June 20, 958, 969, 971, 972, 991,992, 1006, 1010, 1017, 1018; June 24, 1254.
Keyham Barton Postal Staff, Increase in June 25, 1047.
Military Loans Bill, Introduction of, etc., June 11, 97; June 13, 299.
Navy;
Belleville Boilers;Substituting Babcock and Wilcox for, June 25, 1398.
Dockyard Labourers, Increase in Wages for Deptford Men, Abolition of Classification among Shipwrights, etc., June 14, 472.
Naval Brigade Service in South Africa, Warrant Officers;War Honours, June 18, 706.
Victualling;Report of Vice-Admiral Rice's Committee, June 11, 57.
Sugar and Fruit Duties;Apricot Pulp, etc., June 14, 417.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 500,501.
Kenmare River
Lights;Erection of Light on Sherky Island, proposed
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 288.
Kennaway, Rt. Hon. Sir J. H. [Devon, Honiton]
Infants, Bodies of Deceased Infants, Disposal of;Legislation proposed, June 11, 60.
Kenyon, Lord
County Councils (Bye-Laws) Bill, 2R., June 20, 880.
Kenyon, Mr. G. T. [Denbigh]
Education Bill;Technical Instruction in Wales, June 20, 908.
Kenyon, Mr. J. [Lancashire, Bury]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 660.
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. D. [Shropshire, Newport]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1539.
Kerry;County Kerry, etc.
Killaghlin Railway;Baronial Guarantee, Increase in
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1221.
Kettering Urban District Water Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 3.
Report,* June 24, 1174.
Keyham Barton Post Office
Increase in Staff
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1407.
Killaglin Railway
Baronial Guarantee, Increase in
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1221.
Killarney
International Boat Race;Police at Queenstown asking Names of Visitors, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 11, 66.
Quarter Sessions;White Glove Calendar, Absence of Sheriff, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 20, 922.
Killcloony Property
Sale of Grass Farms to Tenants
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 290.
Killilan Deer Forest
Extension of;Alleged Clearing and Afforesting of Faddoch Farm, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 13, 286.
Kimber, Mr. H. [Wandsworth]
Retired Colonels, Granting Rank of Generals, proposed, June 13, 268.
King Edward VII.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against, see Roman Catholicism.
King's Royal Rifles
Second Battalion returned to India from Ladysmith;Refunding Outfit Expenses, etc.
Q. Mr. Mansfield; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 703.
King's Scholarship Examination
Pupil Teachers from Country Schools, Number examined in, 1900, etc.
Q. Mr. Llewellyn; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 18, 719.
King's Norton and Northfield Urban District Tramways Bill
c. Report,* June 20, 884.
Kingston-upon-Hull Corporation Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 682.
Knowles, Mr. Lees [Salford, W.]
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 860; June 26, 1567, 1571.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 178, 187, 198, 199.
Konia
British Vice-Consulate, Abolition of
Q. Earl Percy; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 18, 711.
Kynoch, Messrs.
Ammunition for Volunteers, Offer of, at Lower Price, etc
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1057.
Annual Meeting;Chairman's Speech on the Burthens of British Industry
Os. Mr. Asquith, June 17, 640; Mr. Taylor, 672.
L
Labouchere, Mr. H. [Northampton]
Civil List Bill, 3R.* June 18, 739, 748.
Gibraltar Harbour Works;Laying Reports of Committee on the Table, June 17, 553.
National Democratic League Meeting, Birmingham;Chief Constable prohibiting, June 25, 1405
South African War;Farm Burning, Action of Gen. Rundle;Blowing up Mills, etc., June 13, 262.
Labour
Child Labour, see that title.
Labourers' Cottages, Ireland
Ahinah;Rejection of J. Desmond's Application
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 427.
Lambert, Mr. G. [Devon, S. Molton]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1528.
China;Kiao Chaon;Despatch of British Troops, June 13, 270.
Consolidated Fund Bill;Date of Second Reading, etc., June 25, 1429
Expiring Laws Continuance Rill;Ballot Act, etc., Permanent Statute, proposed June 14, 429.
Milk Standard, Fixing;Report of Departmental Committee, June 14, 422.
South African Stock Farms, Establishment of, by the Government, June 11, 52.
South African War
Cost of the War
Carrying on the War without Appealing to Parliament for Sanction for Further Expenditure, June 25, 1392.
Weekly Cost, Maintenance of Concentration Camps, etc., June 25, 1392.
Horses;Supply of Remounts, etc., June 25, 1429, 1432.
Lambton, Mr. F. W. [Durham, S.E.]
"Daring," H.M.S.;Boiler Explosion, June 11, 57.
Lanarkshire
Sheriff Substitute Appointment
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1134, 1135.
Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway (Various Powers) Bill
l. 2R.* June 13, 213.
Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway (Dearne Valley Junction Railways) Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Report from Select Committee, June 25, 1335.
Lancaster, Duchy of
Hereditary Revenues, Surrender of;Inclusion of Duchy of Lancaster
References to, in Debate on Civil List Bill, June 18, 744, 746, 749.
Property Tax and Local Rates, Payment of Os. Mr. Caldwell, June 18, 738; Sir M. H. Beach, 738.
Land Commission, Ireland
Cork County;J. Cronin's Farms, Insufficiency of Purchase Money to redeem superior Interests, etc.
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 297.
Report, Date of Presenting to the House Q. Mr. T. W. Russell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1419.
Land Judges' Court, Ireland
Delay in Sale of Land to Tenants
Q. Mr. T. W. Russell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 289.
Cavan, County
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 295.
Land Purchase, etc., Ireland
Difficulties of Tenants disposing of Interests in their Holdings
Q. Mr. E. Barry; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1224.
Number of Tenant-Purchasers under various Acts
Q. Mr. T. W. Russell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1413.
Lands Valuation (Scotland) Act 1854 Amendment Bill
Petitions, June 13, 256.
Langley, Mr. Batty [Sheffield, Attercliffe]
Evening Continuation Classes, Position of such Bodies as the Polytechnic, etc., in the event of the Education Bill becoming Law, June 25, 1413.
Languages
Diplomatic and Consular Service, see that title.
Irish Language, see that title.
Modern Languages and the Public Service;Proposed Appointment of Committee
Q. Mr. Crombie; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 68.
Lansdowne, Marquess of;Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
Egyptian Exiles;Release of Arabi Pasha, etc., June 17, 529.
Larceny Bill
c. Report,* June 21, 1081.
Lascar Seamen
see Seamen;Crew Accommodation.
Laundries
Extension of the Factory Acts, see Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill.
Law, Mr. A. B. [Glasgow, Blaekfriars]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1450.
Lawrence, Mr. W. F. [Liverpool, Abercromby]
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 944.
Lawson, Mr. J. Grant;Secretary to the Local Government Board [York, N.R., Thirsk]
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con., June 17, 533.
Registration of Births and Deaths Bill, Intro., June 13, 329; 2R. June 17, 678.
Layland-Barratt, Mr. F. [Devon, Torquay]
Sea Fisheries;Committee of Inquiry, Appointment, June 21, 1062.
Leamy, Mr. E. [Kildare, N]
Intermediate Education, Ireland, Teaching Irish Language, etc.;New Rules, June 21, 1169.
Leasehold Enfranchisement (England and Wales) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 49.
Leatherhead Gas Bill
l. Report,* June 14, 377.
3R* June 20, 871.
c. Lords' Amendts.,* June 25, 1387.
Lecky, Rt. Hon. W. E. H. [Dublin University]
Limerick Disturbances;Case of Dr. Long, June 18, 722.
Lee, Mr. Arthur [Hants, Fareham]
Postage Stamp Perforation;Tendency to tear irregularly, June 11, 63.
Leeds
Housing of the Working Classes, see title Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of the Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill
School Board and Cockerton Judgment;Circulation of Letter, etc.
Q. Mr. Jackson; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 908.
Leeds Churches Bill
l. Report,* June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1335.
Leeds Corporation (General Powers) Bill
c. 2R.* June 13, 251.
Leeds Corporation Water Bill
l. Report,* June 13, 213.
3R., June 24, 1175.
c. 1R.* June 25, 1389.
Lees, Sir Elliott [Birkenhead]
Invalided Soldiers, Treatment of;Examination of Patients by Medical Boards, etc., June 20, 889.
Legge, Col. H. [St. George's, Hanover Square]
Horses, Number obtained in South Africa;Report, June 11, 54, 55.
Leng, Sir J. [Dundee]
Art Galleries, Scotland;Loan Collections, etc., June 21, 1109.
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con., June 17, 533.
Census Returns, Scotland;Return of Valuation, Population, etc., of Counties and Boroughs, June 24, 1219.
Courts-Martial Sentences in South Africa, Revision of, etc., June 20, 890.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R., June 19, 837.
Indian Finance;Explanatory Memorandum, June 24, 1201.
Reservists returned home;Detention at Aldershot, June 20, 892.
Letters
House to House Deliveries;Number of letters delivered, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. H. Fisher, June 21, 1068.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1409.
South African War;Non-delivery of Letters to Troops, Complaints
Qs. Mr. E. Cecil: Mr. Pirie; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 891.
Lewis, Island of
Congestion;Hardships of Cottars and Crofters, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131.
Land, Setting People on;Croir Farm, etc. References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131, 1147.
Lewis, Mr. J. Herbert [Flint Boroughs]
Calcutta, Bishop of;Conferring Style and Precedence of Archbishop, proposed, June 20, 898.
Coal, Export Duty;Effect on Italian Contracts, June 20, 901.
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1288.
Gibraltar Harbour Works;Cost of completing Works, June 18, 706.
South African War;Refuge Camps
Bloemfontein;Health of Children, Report of Medical Officer, June 21, 1055.
Children, Total Number of;School Accommodation, June 21, 1053.
Condition of Camps, Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality, etc., June 17, 618.
Instruction of Children, etc., June 21, 1053.
Johannesburg, Mortality at, June 13, 263.
Ministers of Religion, Permission to Visit, etc., June 24, 1196.
Mortality Statistics, June 17, 541.
Overcrowding;Proposed New Camps, etc., June 18, 700.
Volunteers;Royal Welsh Fusiliers, want of Arms and Equipment, June 20, 894.
Libraries
Elementary School Libraries, Legality of Expenditure on
Q. Mr. G. White; A. Mr. W. Long, June 25, 1406.
Licensing Acts Amendment (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, June 13, 256.
Licensing Bill
l. Report,* June 11, 7; June 14, 383, 3R., June 20, 877.
Petitions, June 11, 7.
Light Railways
see Railways.
Light Railways Bill
Cycles Conveyance
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 13, 277.
Petitions, June 12, 147.
Lights and Lighthouses
Ireland
Kenmare River;Erection of Light on Sherky Island, proposed
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 288.
Maiden Lights, Improvement of
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 20, 924.
Red Sea, see that title.
Lights on Vehicles Bill
Petitions, June 11, 40.
Lillywhite, C.
Arrest of, on charge of Murder;Compensation Question
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 25, 1404.
Limerick
County Council Quarterly Meetings;Substitution of Half-yearly meetings proposed
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1078.
Long, Dr., Charge of Proselytising;Hostile Demonstration against Dr. Long, etc.
Qs. Mr. W. Johnston, Mr. O'Shaugh-nessy, Mr. Lecky, Mr. Lundon, Mr. Delany, Mr. J. Redmond, Capt. Donelan; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 721.
Linlithgow
Procurator's Fiscal Appointment
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1134, 1136.
Liquor Traffic (Local Veto) (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, June 13, 256; June 19, 814.
Liquor Traffic and Liquor Licensing Laws
Birkenhead Licensing Case, see Birkenhead
Licence Duty on Public Houses, Increase of
Os. Mr. S. Buxton, June 24, 1242; Sir M. H. Beach, 1261.
Lisburn
Disturbances;Mr. Trew's Speeches, Prosecution proposed
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 914.
Lloyd-George, Mr. D. [Carnarvon, etc.]
China;Shanghai, German Garrison, Retention of, June 17, 551.
National Democratic League Meeting at Birmingham;Chief Constable prohibiting, June 25, 1404, 1400.
Penrhyn Quarry Dispute;Military Aid to the Civil Power, June 14, 413; June 17, 548.
South African War
Boer Leaders, Communications with;Feeding Women and Children in denuded Districts, June 21, 1055.
Cape Colony, Number of Armed Boers in, June 25, 1391.
Capture of Horses by the Boers near Colesberg, etc., June 25, 1427.
Farm-burning by the British;Lord Roberts' Reports and Correspondence with Gen. Botha, June 11, 51.
Natives, Protection of;Compensation for Loss of Cattle, etc., June 14, 409, 410.
Refuge Camps
Condition of Camps, Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality among, etc., June 17, 573.
Dietary, Improvement of, etc., June 20, 889.
Mortality Statistics, June 17, 541, 543.
Waterkloof and Colesberg Actions, Casualties, Capture of Horses, etc., June 25, 1392.
Llandrindod Wells Urban District Council Water Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 3.
Llanelly
Education Question;Public Meeting, Proposed Temporary Bill
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 907.
Llannwchllyn
Mail Service;Conveyance of Mails by Train from Bala, proposed
Q. Mr. O. Williams; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 63.
Llewellyn, Mr. E. H. [Somerset, N.]
Beer Rations on Transports from South Africa, etc., June 18, 705.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill 2R., June 19, 859.
Pupil Teachers in Country Schools;Number examined at King's Scholarship Examination in 1900, etc., June 18, 719.
Loans
Loans raised in India, etc.;Return Presented, June 20, 873, 885.
Loan Societies, England and Wales;Abstract of Accounts Presented, June 20, 873, 886.
Newtown Urban District Council's Application for Loan for Gasworks refused
Q. Lt. Col. Pryce-Jones; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 62.
Local Authorities Officers' Superannuation Bill
Petitions, June 26, 1510.
Local Government Board
President;Rt. Hon. W. H. Long.
Parliamentary Secretary;Mr. J. Grant Lawson.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 1) Bill
l. Com.* June 21, 1024.
3R.* June 24, 1182.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
l. Com.* June 21, 1024.
3R.* June 24, 1182.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 3) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com.* June 21, 1024.
3R.* June 24, 1182.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 4) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 697.
Con.* June 19, 814.
c. 3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 873.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 5) Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 14, 402.
3R.* June 17, 537.
l. 1R.* June 18, 684.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 6) Bill
c. Report,* June 21, 1049.
Con.* and 3R., June 24, 1191.
l. 1R.* June 24, 1183.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 8) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 697.
3R.* June 19, 813.
l. 1R.* June 20, 872.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 9) Bill
c. Report,* June 20, 1584.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 10) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 697.
3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 873.
Local Government Provisional Orders (No. 12) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 697.
Con.* June 19, 814.
3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 873.
Local Government Provisional Order (Gas) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of the Working Classes) Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 14, 402.
3R.* June 17, 537.
l. 1R.* June 18, 684.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of the Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill
c. 2R.* June 14, 388.
l. 1R.* June 20, 873.
Division List Error, June 14, 508.
Local Government Provisional Order (Ireland) Bills
Patting in Force from Sept, 30, proposed
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 570.
Local Government Provisional Order (Ireland) (No. 1) Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 380.
Com. and Report, * June 18, 684.
3R.* June 24, 1181.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (No. 2) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com.* and Report,* June 24, 1181.
3R.* June 25, 1343.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (No. 3) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 697.
3R.* June 19, 813.
l. 1R.* June 20, 873.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (No. 4) Bill
c., 2R.* June 11, 39.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (No. 5) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 698.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 873.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (Housing of the Working Classes) Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 698.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 873.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Ireland) (Housing of the Working classes) (No. 2) Bill.
c. Report,* June 18, 698.
Con.* June 19, 814.
3R.* June 20, 883.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Poor Law) Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 684.
Com* June 21, 1024.
3R.* June 24, 1182.
Local Taxation
Ireland, Assessments;Re-valuation Appeals, Assimilating Irish System to that of England, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 727.
Rate Collectors collecting for Denominational Schools;Placing Sums upon Rate Tickets, etc.
Q. Mr. G. White; A. Mr. Long, June 11, 60.
Royal Commission;Report Presented, June 12, 148; June 13, 215.
Local Taxation Account, Scotland
Secondary and Technical Education, see title Education;Scotland
Lockwood, Col. A. [Essex, Epping]
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R. June 19, 857.
Loder, Mr. G. W. E. [Brighton]
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con. June 17, 532.
National Gallery;Protection from Fire, Mr. Sherman's Report, etc., June 11, 65.
"Orders of the Day";Government Orders put down first on Tuesday, June 11, 70.
London Borough Councils
Auditor, Duties of;Surcharges made by Auditor on Ground of Illegal Expenditure, Right of Appeal, etc.
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. Long, June 17, 561.
London Borough Councils (Women's Disabilities Removal) Bill
Petitions, June 17, 512; June 18, 685.
London Bridge Widening Bill
c. Lords' Amends.,* June 14, 401.
London, Brighton and South Coast Railway Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
London (City) School for Orphans of Freemen Bill
c. Report* June 13, 253.
3R.* June 17, 536.
London County Council (General Powers) Bill
l. 2R.* June 20, 870.
London County Council (Money) Bill
l. 2R., June 14, 378.
London County Council (Tramways and Street Widenings) Bill
c. 1R.* June 11, 6.
l. 2R.* June 20, 870.
London and India Docks (New Works) Bill
c. 3R.* June 13, 251.
l. 1R.* June 14, 379.
2R.* June 21, 1021.
London Riverside Fishmarket Bill
l. 2R * June 13, 213.
London School Board
Schedule of proposed Site of School between Bromley and Portland Street, Stepney;Petition, June 11, 50.
London Streets
see Streets.
London Tilbury and Southend Railway Bill
l. 2R.* June 20, 870.
London United Tramways Bill
c. Report,* June 24, 1192.
London Volunteers
see Volunteers.
Londonderry
Derry Central Railway;Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, see that title.
Long, Dr.
see Limerick.
Long, Rt. Hon. Walter;President of the Local Government Board [Bristol, S.]
Aliens in London;Census Returns, June 13, 281.
Aliens suffering from Contagious Diseases, United States Regulations;Similar Regulations for Great Britain, June 25, 1406.
Food and Drugs Act Prosecutions;Analysis of Local Public Analysts, etc., June 18, 715.
Food Preservatives;Report of Departmental Committee, June 18, 715.
Higher Elementary Schools;Cockerton Judgment, Surcharges by Auditors, June 20, 909.
Infants, Bodies of Deceased Infants, Disposal of;Legislation proposed, June 11, 60.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 393.
London Borough Councils, Auditor, Duties of;Surcharges made by Auditor on ground of Illegal Expenditure, Bight of Appeal, etc., June 17, 562.
Rate Collectors collecting for Denominational Schools;Placing Sums upon Rate Tickets, June 11, 61.
School Libraries
Auditor surcharging Expenditure to Members of School Board, June 25, 1406.
Expenditure on;Legality of Expenditure, June 25, 1407.
Lonsdale, Mr. J. B. [Armagh, Mid]
Railway Companies and Telegraph Service;Value of Services rendered by Post Office in 1900 and 1901, June 13, 281.
Lord Advocate for Scotland
Rt. Hon. A. G. Murray.
Lord Chancellor
Earl of Halsbury.
Lord Chancellor of Ireland
Lord Ashbourne.
Lord Chief Justice of England
Baron Alverstone.
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
Earl Cadogan.
Lough, Mr. T. [Islington, W.]
Butter, Prices in Irish Statistics for 1900;Prices of Creamery Butter, etc., June 13, 289.
Child Labour;Employment of Children of School Age, Inter-Departmental Inquiry, June 18, 720.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 762, 763, 779; June 20, 981, 989, 995, 1004, 1014, 1018, 1020; June 24, 1237, 1238.
Food Preservatives;Report of Departmental Committee, June 18, 715.
Light Railways Bill;Cycles, Conveyance of, etc. June 13, 277.
London Borough Councils, Auditor, Duties of;Surcharges made by Auditor on ground of Illegal Expenditure, Right of Appeal, etc., June 17, 562.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill, 3R., June 11, 9.
Transvaal;Financial Condition, Sir D. Barbour's Report, June 17, 539.
Lowestoft Corporation Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 20, 871.
Report*, June 24, 1174.
Lowther, Rt. Hon. James [Kent, Thanet]
Alien Immigrants;Legislation proposed, June 17, 553.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con. June 12, 155, 159, 176.
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1231.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme;Suspension of Works on the Western side of the Rock, etc., June 13, 304.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 202.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1513, 1516.
Lowther, Rt. Hon. J. W.;Chairman of Committees (Cumberland, Penrith)
Bills
Amendments
Amendment Controverting main Principle;Striking out "Eight Hours" of the Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, June 12, 180, 181, 182, 183, 186, 187, 188, 202.
Amendments in the wrong place and Amendmonts out of Order;Finance Bill, June 18, 756; June 24, 1285, 1287.
Amendment passed over;Absence of Member in charge of Amendment, June 18, 769.
Discussing Bill as a whole on a Motion to postpone first Clause, June 12, 176.
Discussion on a Motion to Report Progress, June 24, 1299.
Title of Bill;Considering title first,. June 12, 181.
Bournemouth Corporation Bill;Compromise, June 14, 388.
Consolidated Fund Bills, Resolutions in Com. of Ways and Means;Raising Question of the Conduct of the War in South Africa, June 25, 1424, 1425, 1426, 1427.
Irrelevant Observations
Finance Bill, June 18, 771, 773, 776, 793, 796, 803; June 20, 953, 970, 971; June 24, 1250, 1251, 1253, 1273, 1274, 1292, 1293.
Irrelevant Arguments on Motion to postpone Clause, June 24, 1275, 1277, 1278, 1279.
Supply, Debate in Committee, June 13, 340.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill, 3R., June 11, 16.
Statements in Committee on Finance by Chancellor of the Exchequer;Such Statements were not regular, but were sometimes made by the General Assent of the Committee, June 24, 1288, 1299.
Supply;Discussing Boilers on Shipbuilding Vote, etc., Vote, June 14 470, 471.
Lucas, Col. F. [Lowestoft]
"Creasy," H.M.S.;Breakdown of Steering Gear, Report of Inquiry, June 13, 269.
Lucas, Mr. R. [Portsmouth]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill;Facilities for passing, etc., June 11, 98.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 491.
Whale Island Bandsmen;Army Pensioners' Allowance, June 21, 1059.
Ludgate Hill Station
Condition of;Want of Accommodation, Filthy Condition, etc.
Debate on South-Eastern and L. C. and D. Railway Bill, June 11, 23.
Lunacy (Ireland) Bill
l. 3R.* June 14, 383.
Lundon, Mr. W. [Limerick, E.]
Intermediate Education, Ireland, Teaching Irish Language, etc.;New Rules, June 22, 1170.
Limerick County Council Meetings;Half-yearly meetings proposed, June 21 1078.
Limerick Disturbances;Case of Dr. Long, June 18, 723.
Roads, Ireland;Employment of Direct Labour Provisional Order, June 14, 428.
Lynton and Barnstaple Railway Bill
c. 2 R* June 12, 145.
M
Macartney, Eight Hon. W. E. [Antrim, S.]
Business of the House;Supply, June 24, 1227.
Cremation Bill, con., June 19, 864; June 26, 1575.
Naval Shipbuilding;Amount Spent on New Construction in 1900, June 14, 416.
MacIver, Mr. D. [Liverpool, Kirkdale]
Finance Bill, com., June 20, 949; June 25, 1499, 1503.
McArthur, Mr. C. [Liverpool, Exchange]
British Investments Abroad;A mount of Income Tax Charged, June 13, 272.
Coal;Export Duty Remissions, Coal Shipped under Contracts made before April 18, etc., June 20, 901.
Finance Bill, com., June 20, 1015.
Seamen and the Manning of Merchant Ships;Supply of Seamen;Loss of the "Primrose Hill," etc., June 13, 365.
Sugar Duty;Molasses for Cattle Feeding, Refunding extra Duty Proposed, June 17, 554.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, con., June 14, 385.
McCalmont, Col. J. [Antrim, E.]
Police Protection in Sligo, Case of Mr. Phibbs, June 20, 920; June 25, 1415.
McCrae, Mr. G. [Edinburgh, E.]
Finance Bill, com., June 18, 791.
Income Tax;Exemption of Fines on Demise of Land, etc., June 17, 555.
M'Dermott, Mr. P. [Kilkenny, N.]
Transvaal and Orange River Colony;Financial Position, Report of Sir D. Barbour, June 11, 55.
Wine, Sale of, from Royal Cellars;Payment of Duty, June 21, 1060.
McGovern, Mr. T. [Cavan, W.]
Bawnboy Rural District, Congestion in;Scheduling Congested Districts, June 20, 918.
Bawnboy Union Hospital Trained Nurse, Salary, etc., June 25, 1417.
Cavan Old Prison, Transfer to Military Authorities, June 25, 1418.
Jones's, J. C, Estate, co. Cavan;Sale of Land to Tenants, June 13, 295.
Public Works, Carrying out;Increasing Powers of County Councils proposed, June 14, 428.
Surveyors of Taxes, Appointment of Clerks;Regulations, June 20, 906.
Swanlinbar Petty Sessions, Attendance of Resident Magistrate, etc., June 21, 1075.
McKenna, Mr. R. [Monmouth, N.]
Army Contracts and the Fair Wage Resolution, June 24, 1197.
Coal;Export Duty, Customs House Rules;Coal sold free on Board at British Port, etc., June 18, 712.
Finance Bill, com., June 18, 793; June 20, 975; June 24, 1277, 1278, 1307; June 25, 1462.
Gibraltar Harbour Works;Report of Committee, June 25, 1420.
Income Tax;Payment by Crown, June 18, 713.
McLaren, Mr. C. B. [Leicester, Bosworth]
Finance Bill, com., June 24, 1309; June 25, 1443, 1492.
Mackerel Fishing Industry
Ireland;Opening Fresh Markets Abroad, Import Duty in Russia, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 911.
Macnamara, Dr. T. J. [Camberwell, N.]
Courts Martial in South Africa;Statistics of Imprisonment, June 11, 55.
Education
Evening School Code for 1901;Date of Issue, June 13, 280.
Higher Elementary Education;Cockerton Judgment
Arrangements for Winter Session, 1901&#x2013;2, Surcharge by Auditors, etc., June 18, 730, 731.
School Boards arranging with Local Authorities for the Continuance of Evening School Work;Funds at the Disposal of Local Authorities, Legality of Expenditure, etc, June 21, 1070; June 24, 1214; June 25, 1412.
Scotland;System of Higher Grade Elementary Education, etc., June 21, 1097, 1104.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, con., June 12, 163, 170, 171.
South-Eastern and London Chatham and Dover Railway Bill, 2R., June 11, 24.
Workmen's Trains;Inadequate Facilities, June 13, 331, 342.
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace
Ireland
Hickson, Mr., Appointment as Resident Magistrate
Q. Mr. Archdale; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 725.
Sligo Magistracy;Area of Adjudication, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 914.
Swanlinbar Petty Sessions, Attend-of Resident Magistrate
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1075.
Walsh, Mr. P. J., appointed as Justice of the Peace
Qs. Mr. W. Johnston, Mr. J. P. Power; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1075.
Maiden Lights
Improvement of, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 20, 924.
Mail Service
American Mails;Sorting Mails during Voyage, Earlier Delivery of Letters by the North German Lloyd, etc.
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1409.
Canada;Firemen of Beaver Line, Rate of Wages, Fair Wage Resolution, etc.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 906.
Llannwychllyn;Conveyance of Mails from Bala by Train, proposed
Q. Mr. O. Williams; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 63.
Scotland
Mallaig, Conveyance of Mails to and from;Agreement with North British Railway Company
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. W. H. Fisher, June 21, 1067.
Stornoway, see that title.
Majendie, Mr. J. H. A. [Portsmouth]
Naval Prize Money, Balance remaining unpaid, etc., June 17, 549.
Malcolm, Mr. Ian [Suffolk, Stowmarket]
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, com., June 12, 188.
Queen's Hall Pro-Boer Meeting;Number of Police employed, etc., June 21, 1064.
Malicious Burning, Ireland
see Ireland.
Mall
Alteration of;Exhibiting Proposed Designs
Q. Maj. Balfour; A. Mr. Douglas, June 18, 721.
Mallaig
Mails, Conveyance of;Agreement with North British Railway Company
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. W. H. Fisher, June 21, 1067.
Mallaranny
Prosecutions for Cattle Trespassing, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 567.
Malta
Language Question;Laying Papers on the Table
Q. Mr. S. Buxton; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 25, 1400.
"Manchester Corporation"
Food Supply, Complaint
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 24, 1210.
Manchester and Liverpool Electric Express Railway Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. 1R.* June 13, 255.
2R.* June 24, 1191.
Mansfield, Mr. H. [Lincoln, Spalding]
Finance Bill, com, June 25, 1482.
King's Royal Rifles;Second Battalion, Return to India from South Africa, Outfit Expenses, June 18, 703.
Money-lenders;Prosecution of Moneylenders failing to register themselves, etc., June 18, 716.
Mansfield Corporation Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Mansfield and District Light Railway
Order Presented, June 14, 381, 406.
Maple, Sir J. B. [Camberwell, Dulwich]
South African War;Horse Transport, Statistics, etc., June 13, 264.
South-Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railway Bill, 2R. June 11, 36.
Maraig
Burial Ground;Overcrowding, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 11, 64.
Mark IV. Bullets
see Bullets.
Marlborough Street Training College, Dublin
Appointment of Principal
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1073
Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister Bill
Business of the House
O. Sir B. Gurdon, June 11, 95.
Petition, June 11, 49.
Marriages Legalisation Bill
c. 1R.* June 25, 1422.
"Massacre of the Innocents"
O. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 71.
Mather, Mr. W. [Lancashire, Rossendale]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 665.
Maxwell, Mr. W. J. [Dumfriesshire]
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, con, June 12, 150, 174.
Mayo County
Police Force;Number of Police 1895&#x2013;1900, Extra Police, etc.
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 912.
Meat
Navy Contracts, see Navy.
Tinned Meat, Soldiers poisoned by at Fermoy, see Army;Meat.
Meat Marking (Ireland) Bill
c 1R.* June 17, 680.
2R.* June 26, 1584.
Medical Officers of Health
Scotland, see that title.
Mediterranean Fleet
Want of Strength and War Organisation;Lord C. Beresford's Letter
Qs. Mr. Norman, Mr. Bowles; As. Mr. Arnold Forster, June 24, 1200
Medway Conservancy
Statement of Receipts and Expenditure Presented, June 13, 215, 258.
Mellor, Rt. Hon. J. W. [York, W. R., Sowerby]
Christ's Hospital [London] Bill, 2R., June 14, 387.
Members of Parliament [Resignation of Seats] Bill
c Bill Withdrawn, June 26, 1583.
Merchandise Marks Acts
Board of Agriculture Report, June 21, 1025.
Merchant Shipping
Deck Cargoes;Board of Trade Regulations, Case of the "Mobile"
Os. Lord Muskerry, Earl of Dudley, June 17, 524.
Food Supply, see title Seamen.
Foreign Masters on British Ships-Merchant Shipping Act Amendment Bill, see that title.
Manning of Ships;Able-bodied Seamen, Proof of Service, etc., see Seamen.
Officers' Certificates;Foreign Officers Certificates, Accepting on British Ships' etc.
Os. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. G. G. Balfour, June 21, 1061.
"Primrose Hill," Loss of, see that title.
Seamen, see that title.
"South Esk," see that title.
Steamship Subsidies, see that title.
Tonnage of Vessels, see that title.
Merchant Shipping Act (1894) Amendment Bill
l. 2R., June 17, 512.
Merchant Shipping Act (1894) Amendment Bill
Debate on Second Reading (Lords), June 17, 512.
British Engineers on Foreign Vessels, 516, 523.
Foreign Masters on British Merchant Vessels
Number, 516, 522.
War;Possible action of Foreign Masters in time of war, 513, 521.
Foreign Seamen on British Vessels, 513, 519.
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board (Canada Dock Works, &amp;c.) Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253.
3R.*, June 19, 813.
Meteorological Reports
Daily Publication at Sub-Post Offices in Agricultural Districts proposed
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 17, 560.
Metropolitan Common Scheme (Ham) Provisional Order Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 5.
Com.* and Report.* June 14, 380.
3R.* June 18, 684.
Metropolitan Common Scheme (Orpington) Provisional Order Bill
l. 2R.* June 21, 1024.
Com.* and Report,* June 24, 1183.
3R.* June 25, 1344.
Metropolitan District Railway Bill
c. 2R.* June 17, 536.
Metropolitan Electric Supply Bill
c. Con.*, June 13, 251.
3R.* June 17, 536.
l. 1R. June 18, 683.
Metropolitan Police
Queen's Hall, Meeting of Opponents of the War;Number of Police Employed, etc.
Qs. Sir J. Stirling-Maxwell, Mr. Malcolm, Mr. E. Robertson; As. Mr. Ritchie, June 21, 1064.
Scotland Yard, see that title.
Wapping Street Disturbance;Absence of Police, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 17, 556.
Metropolitan Police Stations
Telephonic Communication
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 20, 904.
Metropolitan Railway Bill
l. 1R.* June 11, 6.
2R.* June 20, 870.
Metropolitan Water Companies (Amendment of Acts) Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Mexico
Emett, Mr. R., Murder of
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 18, 711.
Middlemore, Mr. J. T. [Birmingham, N.]
National Gallery;Protection from Fire, June 17, 564.
Midland Railway Bill
l 3R.* June 11, 4.
c. Lords Amendments considered,* June 18, 696.
Milford Docks Bill
c. Report* June 13, 253.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
Military Lands Provisional Orders Bill
l. Com.* and Report, June 14, 380.
3R.* June 17, 511.
Military Lands Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
c. 2R.* June 11, 47.
Report* June 20, 884.
3R.* June 21, 1049.
l. 1R.* June 24, 1183.
Military Loans Bill
Date of Introduction
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 299.
Militia
Army Commissions;Number granted to Militia Officers since the Outbreak of War in South Africa
Os. Duke of Bedford, Lord Raglan, June 25, 1361, 1383.
Disembodiment of Battalions serving at Home
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1058.
Guernsey Militia;Re-organisation
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 55.
Ireland;Recruiting Statistics
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 415.
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 894.
Officers, Scarcity of
O. Duke of Bedford, June 25, 1361.
Reserve, Re-organization Proposals, I Conditions of Service;Inadequate Separation Allowances, etc.
Debate (Lords) June 25, 1360.
Seaforth Militia, Return from Egypt;Insufficient Steamer Accommodation to Scornoway
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, June 21, 1057.
Milk
Standard, Fixing;Report of Departmental Committee
Qs. Mr. Strachey, Sir M. Bhownaggree, Mr. Lambert; As. Mr. Hanbury, June 14, 422.
Mineral and Metallurgical Industries
Russia;Report Presented, June 20, 873.
Mines
Coal Mines, see that title.
Wales, see that title.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill
c. Com. June 12, 176.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill
Debate in Com. (Commons), June 12, 176.
Omission of Number of Hours proposed, 201, 202.
Ten hours, to be substituted for eight, proposed, 193, 197, 198, 199, 200, 203.
Title of Bill;Postponement of Clause 1, etc., 176, 178, 180, 181, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190.
Petitions, June 11, 49, 147; June 21, 1051.
"Mobile," S. S.
Deck Cargoes;Board of Trade Regulations, etc.
Os. Lord Muskerry, Early of Dudley, June 17, 524.
Modern Languages
see Languages.
Molasses
Sugar Duty;Budget Proposals
(See also Sugar Duty), Finance Bill Debate, June 20, 1003.
Mombasa
Government Cargoes for;Charter of Vessels, Rate of Freight, etc.
Q. Col. Denny; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 13, 273.
Mond Gas Bill
l. 2R.* June 20, 871.
Money Orders
Charges for French and English Orders, compared
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1216.
Telegraphic Money Orders, Introduction of Indian System into United Kingdom
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1217.
Money-lenders
Prosecution of Money-lenders failing to register themselves;Board of Inland Revenue Note, etc.
Q. Mr. Mansfield; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 716.
"Mongolian"
Transport to South Africa;Registered Accommodation for Troops, Illness on Board, etc.
Qs. Sir W. Foster, Mr. Seely; As. Lord Stanley, Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 14, 411.
Monkswell, Lord
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 25, 1349.
Mooney, Mr. J. J. [Dublin Co., S.]
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Case of Sergeant Starkey, June 21, 1074.
Dublin Metropolitan Police;Sending to Hythe for Musketry Drill, etc., June 11, 68.
Morgan Mr. D. J. [Essex, Walthamstow]
Workmen's Trains;Inadequate Facilities June 13, 338, 343.
Morgan, Mr. J. L. [Carmarthen, W.]
Meteorological Reports;Daily Publication at Sub-Post Offices in Agricultural Districts, June 17, 560.
Morley, Earl of;Chairman of Committees
Glasgow Corporation (Police) Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 25, 1341.
Harrogate Water Bill;Locus Standi question, etc., June 21, 1023.
Leeds Corporation Water Bill;Locus Standi question, June 24, 1178.
Morley, Rt. Hon. J. [Montrose, etc.]
Cape Colony Parliament;Summoning, Responsibility of Governor, June 25, 1391.
Morocco
French Influence, Extension of
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 11, 59.
Trade Report Presented, June 20, 873.
Morris, Mr. M. H. F. [Galway]
Arran, Island of;Proposed Signal Station June 20, 898.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 26, 1578.
University Education Commission, Ireland;Names of Members and Terms of Reference, June 20, 925.
Morton, Mr. A. H. A. [Deptford]
Dockyard Labourers;Increase of Wages for Deptford Men. June 14, 473.
Morton, Mr. E. J. C. [Devonport]
Business of the House;State of Government Business, etc., June 11, 98.
Dockyard Labourers' Wages;Position of Hired Men, etc., June 14, 473, 476.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 997; June 24, 1264.
Moss, Mr. S. [Denbighshire, E.]
Education in Wales;County Schools and Education Bill, Section 6, etc., June 20, 907.
Welsh Mines, Inspectors of;Appointment of Welsh-speaking Inspector, etc., June 13, 274; June 14, 420.
Moulton Mr. J. F. [Cornwall, Launceston]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1534.
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 994, 997, 1005, 1006, 1014, 1015, 1019.
Mowbray, Lord
Earldom of Norfolk;Petition considered by Committee for Privileges, June 25, 1333.
Moystown
Arson Case;Holding Special Court, alleged
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 13, 292.
Mullough
Dismissal of Police Officers
Q. Mr. Dillon; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 294.
Municipal Authorities
Higher Elementary Education, see title Education.
Murnaghan, Mr. G. [Tyrone, Mid]
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, 2R., June 18, 694, 695.
Dromore Tenement Houses, Unsanitary Condition of, June 25, 1417.
Intermediate Education;Preparatory Grade Prizes, Discontinuance of, June 20, 915.
Pauper Children, Ireland;Classifying Children under two years of Age as Sick, etc., June 13, 294.
Ulster;Railways and Fruit Carriage, Complaints, June 18, 724.
Murphy, Mr. J. [Kerry, E.]
Irish Barrack Stores, Purchasing at Woolwich;Complaints, June 18, 704.
Belfast Riots;Incitement by Mr. Trew, June 21, 1076.
Customs;Passengers' Luggage, Examination of at Southampton, etc., June 20, 903.
Killaglin Railway;Baronial Guarantee, Increase in, June 24, 1221.
Killarney
Quarter Sessions;White Glove Calendar, Absence of Sheriff, etc., June 20, 922.
Visitors to;Action of Police at Queenstown, June 11, 66.
Wapping Street Disturbance;Absence of Police, etc., June 17, 556.
Murray, Rt. Hon. A. G.;Lord Advocate [Buteshire]
Applecross Fishery;Erection of Pier at Annat Proposed, June 14, 425.
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 11, 42.
Joint Committee of Lords and Commons proposed, June 13, 236, 239, 251.
Avoch Harbour, Repair of, June 13, 285.
Brechin Intimidation Case;Sentence on James Bean, June 13, 285, 286; June 21, 1072.
Burgh Auditors;Power of Secretary of State to appoint, June 11, 65.
Congested Districts Board
Administration;Settling People on the Land, Development of Agricultural Stock, Construction of Roads, etc., June 21, 1145.
Ross and Cromarty;Settling People on the Land;Non-acquisition of Land, etc., June 20, 911.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 861.
Edinburgh
National Gallery;Increase in Grant proposed, Purchase of Pictures, etc, June 21, 1107.
Sasine Office, Registration Fees, June 25, 1413.
Education;Training Colleges, Mr. Carnegie's Gift, etc., June 21, 1098.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 152, 158, 169, 170, 172, 175; 3R., June 19, 842.
Glasgow;Electric Tram Accidents in 1901, etc., June 14, 425.
Judicial Statistics;Returns from Sasine Office, Alleged Omission, June 18, 720.
Killilan Deer Forests, Extension of, June 13, 286.
Lanark Sheriff Substitute and Linlithgow Procurator Fiscal;Appointments, June 21, 1135.
Maraig Burial Ground, Overcrowding, etc., June 11, 64.
Medical Officers of Health, Appointment of, etc.
Districts other than Burghs, June 20, 910.
Highlands and Islands;Appointment of Officers without Public Health Diplomas, June 14, 426.
Number of, etc., June 11, 64.
Number Holding Public Health Diplomas, June 13, 287.
Prisons;Perth Prison, etc., June 21, 1130.
Shader Cove;Petition for Removal of Overhanging Rock, June 13, 285.
Muskerry, Lord
Board of Trade Nautical Staff;Return, June 18, 686.
Deck Cargoes;Board of Trade Regulations, June 17, 524.
Merchant Shipping Act (1894), Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 513, 524.
Seamen's Food and Accommodation;Committee of Inquiry, June 18, 687.
Sligo County Council Printing Contract, June 14, 383.
N
Nannetti, Mr. J. P. [Dublin, College Green]
Army Contracts;Irish Firms
Barrack Stores;Purchasing at Woolwich, June 17, 548.
Beer Contracts, Withdrawing from Irish Firms, June 17, 547.
Blackie, Messrs., and Co., Government Contractors;Fair Wage Resolution, June 13, 293.
Canadian Mail Service;Firemen of Beaver Line, Rate of Wages, June 20, 906.
Factory and Workshop Act Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 641.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 782.
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2) Bill, 2R., June 14, 390.
Seamen;Food Supply, Complaint with reference to the "Manchester Corporation," June 24, 1210.
University Education, Ireland, Royal Commission;Printing Evidence in Ireland, June 25, 1421.
Volunteers, Ireland;Volunteers drilling with Regulars in Dublin, etc., June 14, 414.
Workmen's Compensation Act;Amendment proposed;Irish Traders' Congress Resolution, June 24, 1226.
Natal
British Owners of Farms, Removal of Restrictions on
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 25, 1391.
National Democratic League
Birmingham Meeting;Notice issued by Chief Constable prohibiting, etc.
Qs. Mr. Lloyd-George, Mr. Labouchere, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Ritchie, June 25, 1404.
National Gallery
Protection from Fire
Isolation of Gallery;Distance of nearest Buildings
Qs. Mr. Middlemore, Lord Balcarres; As. Mr. A. Douglas, June 17, 564.
Sherman's, Mr., Report, Proposed Amendment of Bill, etc.
Qs. Mr. Loder, Dr. Farquharson; As. Mr. A. Douglas, June 11, 65.
National Gallery, Scotland
see Edinburgh.
National Gallery (Purchase of Adjacent Land) Bill
c. 2R.* June 17, 676.
Petitions, June 24, 1193.
Members of Select Committee nominated, June 24, 1332.
National Gallery (Purchase of Adjacent Land) (Expenses)
Motion (Mr. Akers-Douglas), June 26, 1583.
National Library, Ireland
see Dublin.
National Portrait Gallery
Annual Report Presented, June 14, 381, 405.
National School Teachers, Ireland
Bracklinn Teacher;Salary, Payment for teaching Irish, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 293.
Glengariff Teacher;Delay in Payment of Grant for teaching Irish
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 569.
Nautical Staff
Board of Trade;Return Ordered
Motion (Lord Muskerry), June 18, 686.
Naval Works Bill
Date of Introduction
Qs. Mr. E. Robertson, Mr. Asquith; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 14, 415.
Gibraltar Harbour Works;Discussing on Naval Works Bill
Os. Mr. G. Bowles; Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 301, 302, 303, 304.
Navan
Mail Service;Delays
Q. Mr. P. White; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 296.
Navy
First Lord;Earl of Selborne.
Secretary;Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster.
Civil Lord;Mr. E. G. Pretyman.
Arran, Island of;Proposed signal station
Q. Mr. Morris; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 898.
Boilers;Water-tube Boilers, etc.
"Daring," H.M.S.;Explosion at Portsmouth
Qs. Mr. Lambton, Mr. W. Allan, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 11, 57.
Ships to be boilered with new type of Boiler
O. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 14, 470, 477; Qs. Sir F. Flannery, Mr. Kearley; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 25, 1396.
"Cressy," H.M.S.;Breakdown of Steering gear, Report of Inquiry
Q. Col. Lucas; A. Mr. Pretyman, June 13, 269.
Cruisers;Underground Cruisers
Os. Mr. W. Allan, Sir F. Flannery, June 14, 484, 485.
"Daring," H.M.S., see sub-heading Boilers.
Dockyards, see that title;also names of Dockyards.
"Euryalus," H.M.S., Fire on
Q. Mr. R. Cavendish; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 11, 58.
Foreign Stations;Distribution of Staff on Shore on different Stations
Os. Sir J. Colomb; June 14, 474; Mr. Arnold-Forster, 476.
Gibraltar Harbour Works, see Gibraltar.
Greenwich Hospital and Travers Foundation, Statement of Accounts Presented, June 11, 51; June 13, 215.
Haulbowline Dockyard;Construction of second dry dock, proposed
Q. Capt. Donelan; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 17, 550.
Meat Contracts
Channel Squadron at Berehaven;Foreign Meat Supplies
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 897.
Supply of Fresh Meat to the Navy in Ireland
Q. Capt. Nolan; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 24, 1199.
Non-inflammable Wood, Use of in the Construction of New Royal Yacht
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 14, 479, 482, 491.
Prize Money, Balance Remaining Unpaid, etc.
Q. Mr. Majendie; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 17, 549.
Religious Ministrations for Dying Seamen;Death of Roman Catholic Seamen on H.M.S. "Diadem "
Qs. Mr. Gilhooly; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 896; June 24, 1198.
"Repulse," H.M.S.;Fatality in Lough Swilly, Testing Fittings at Chatham
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 898.
Shipbuilding
Amount Spent on New Construction in 1900
Q. Mr. Macartney; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster June 14, 416.
Designer of New Royal Yacht;Designing and Superintending Construction of Naval Ships
Q. Mr. Hoult; A. Mr. Arnold-Foster, June 25, 1394.
Shipbuilding Programme Discussion, Bringing Forward Personnel Vote before Mat&#x00E9;riel Vote;Mat&#x00E9;riel Vote
Os. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Sir C. Dilke, Mr. Kearley, June 14, 505, 507.
Shipbuilding Repairs, etc., Estimates, see Navy Estimates.
Shipwrights, Abolition of Classification and increase in Wages
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 14, 469.
South African War;War Honours for Warrant Officers
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Pretyman, June 18, 706.
Stokers, Inadequate Number of, etc.
Q. Mr. Platt-Higgins; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 21, 1059.
Surveys;Hydrographers' Report Presented, June 11, 51; June 13, 214.
"Sybille," H.M.S., Wreck of;Composition of Force Afloat and Ashore.
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 895.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht, see that title.
Victualling;Report of Vice-Admiral Rice's Committee
Qs. Mr. Norman, Mr. Kearley; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 11, 56.
Water-tube Boilers, see sub-heading Boilers.
Whale Island Bandsmen;Army Pensioners' Allowance
Q. Mr. R. Lucas; A. Mr. Arnold Forster, June 21, 1059.
Navy Estimates
Procedure;Shipbuilding Vote, Bringing forward the Personnel Vote before the Mat&#x00E9;riel, Secretary to Admiralty omitting to make Statement;Opportunity for discussing the Mat&#x00E9;riel Vote
Os. Sir C. Dilke, Mr. Kearley, Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 14, 505, 507.
Shipbuilding, Repairs, Maintenance, etc.
Mat&#x00E9;riel;;5,306,500, Com., June 14, 476.
Personnel;;2,684,000, Com., June 14, 467; Rep.* June 24, 1320.
Neath Harbour Bill
l. Report,* June 14, 378.
3R.* June 18, 682.
New Caledonia
Trade Report Presented, June 13, 214.
New Peers
see Parliament;House of Lords.
New Swindon Gas Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253.
Con.* June 24, 1190.
Newcastle-upon-Tyne Gateshead Water Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
l. Commons Amendts.* June 25, 1336.
Newlands, Lord
Glasgow Corporation (Police) Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 25, 1337.
Newport (Isle of Wight) Gas Bill
l. Report,* June 14, 377.
3R.* June 30, 871.
c. 1R.* June 21, 1050.
Newry Port and Harbour Trust Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Newspapers
Postage to the Colonies, Reduction proposed
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1411.
Newton Abbot
Postmen's Petitions to the Postmaster-General
Q. Mr. Seale-Hayne; A. Mr. A Chamberlain, June 25, 1408.
Newton, Lord
Egyptian Exiles;Release of Arabi Pasha etc., June 17, 527.
Newtown
Urban District Council;Application for Loan for Gas Works refused
Q. Lt. Cl. Pryce-Jones; A. Mr. A Chamberlain, June 11, 62.
Nidd Valley Light Railway
Order Presented, June 14, 381, 405.
Ningpo
Trade Report Presented, June 17, 511.
Nitrate Railway Company Bill
c. Report.* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
Nolan, Col. J. P. [Galway, N.]
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 792, 807; June 20, 1015, 1019.
Killclooney Property;Sale of Grass Farms to Tenants) June 13, 290
Meat for the Navy in Ireland;Fresh Meat Contracts, June 24, 1199.
Rifles;New Rifles, Placingl Specimen in Tea Room of House of Commons June 24, 1331.
Roman Catholicism, Royal Declaration against;Declarations of Heads of States of Germany, France, etc., June 13, 298, 299.
Nolan, Mr. J. [Louth, S.]
Local Government Provisional Orders (Housing of Working Classes) (No. 2). Bill, 2R., June 14, 388.
Norfolk, Earldom of
Petition of Charles Botolph Joseph, Lord Mowbray, etc.;Considered by Committee of Privileges, June 25, 1333.
Norman, Mr. H. [Wolverhampton, S.]
Army
Automatic Rifles, Issue of June 20, 893.
Small Arms Ammunition, Reserve of, Calling in Yeomanry Reserve, June 11, 53.
China
Shanghai, German Garrison at, June 11, 59.
Yun-nan;French Rail way from Tong-king to Yun-nan-fu, June 24, 1202.
Diplomatic and Consular Services;United States, Germany and France, Annual Cost of Service, June 20, 899.
Mediterranean Fleet;Lord C. Beresford's Letter, June 24, 1200.
Morocco, French Influense in, June 11, 59.
Navy
"Repulse," H.M.S., Fatality in. Lough Swilly;Testing Fittings at Chatham, June 20, 898.
Victualling;Report of Vice-Admiral Rice's Committee, June 11, 56.
Thibet;Mission to Russia, to solicit Protection against British Encroachments, alleged, June 21, 1060.
Volunteers, Ammunition for;Messrs. Kynoch's Offer, June 21, 1057.
War Office Organisation;Report of Committee, Delay in Publication, June 11, 53.
North British Railway Bill
l. 2R.* June 20, 870.
North British and Mercantile Insurance Company's Provisional Order Bill
l. 3R.* June 25, 1343.
North Eastern Railway Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 3.
Report,* June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1336.
Northampton
Telephone Service from London;Delays Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 282.
Northbrook, Earl of
County Councils (Bye-laws) Bill, 2R., June 20, 880.
Harrogate Water Bill;locus standi, etc., June 21, 1022.
Norton, Capt C. W. [Newington, W.]
Army
Clothing Department;Writers' Overtime Pay, Placing on same Footing as Storehouse Men, etc., June 25, 1394.
Horses
Purchase of Glasgow Tram Horses, proposed, June 21, 1055.
Transport to South Africa;Horses Thrown Overboard from the "Cervona," June 21, 1056.
Medical Department;Appointment of Director General, June 20, 895.
Reserve Garrison, Artillery, First Class;Continuous Working Furlough, June 18, 705.
Staff Paymasters;Increase in Pay, proposed, June 24, 1198.
War Office Vote- Date of Taking, Opportunity for Discussion, etc., June 13, 299.
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill, 2R., June 14, 387.
Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1028.
Flogging Soldier on hoard Transport Ship, June 25, 1393.
Metropolitan Police Stations, Telephonic Communication between, June 20, 904.
Post Office
Employees;Somerset House Officials, etc., assisting in sorting in the Evening, June 14, 424.
Postal Order Branch;Women Clerks, Petition for Increase of Salary, June 13, 282.
Telegraph Service;Submarine Telegraph Company's ex-Clerks, Counting Service towards Pensions, June 14, 424.
Railways;Issue of Third-Class Season Tickets, June 25, 1403.
Scotland Yard Staff;Salaries, Increase June 25, 1403.
South-Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railways Bill, 2R., June 11, 34.
Workmen's Trains;Inadequate Facilities, June 13, 335, 341, 344.
Norway and Sweden
Timber, Export Duty proposed in Retaliation for British Coal Export Duty
O. Sir J. Joicey, June 24, 1315.
Notting Hill Electric Lighting Bill
c. Con.* June 11, 417.
3R.* June 14, 401.
l. 1R.* June 17, 511.
2R.* June 25, 1335.
Nuneaton and District Light Railway
Order Presented, June 14, 381, 406.
O
Oakham Water Bill
c. 3.R* June 14, 401
l. Commons Amendments, June 17, 511.
O'Brien, Mr. J. F. X. [Cork]
Cork Gas Workers' Strike;Sergeant Williams's Interference, alleged, June 21, 1076.
O'Brien, Mr. K. [Tipperary, Mid.]
Templemore Water Supply, Delay in effecting Improvements in, June 21, 1073.
O'Brien, Mr. P. [Kilkenny]
Belfast Riots
Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, etc., June 14, 430, 432, 433
Trew's, Mr., Speeches, laying on the Table proposed, June 17, 570.
Constabulary;Royal Irish;Returns, June 24, 1220.
Fisheries, Ireland, Commissioners;Appointment of Mr. Lane, June 17, 565; June 20, 918.
Lisburn Disturbances;Mr. Trew's Speeches, Prosecution, proposed, June 20, 914.
Passengers' Luggage, Examination of, at Southampton, etc., June 20, 904.
Potato Spraying, Ireland;Names, Qualifications, etc., of Instructors, June 17, 565.
Public Accounts, Auditing in Dublin, proposed, June 20, 923.
South African War;Shooting of Burghers at Pretoria, Breach of Oath of Neutrality, June 14, 408.
University Education, Royal Commission on;Place of Sittings, etc., June 21, 1079.
Wine;Royal Cellars, Sale of Wine from;Payment of Duty, June 21, 1060.
Workhouses, Ireland;Amalgamation of Unions, etc., June 20, 913.
Observatories
Cape of Good Hope Observatory Report Presented, June 11, 51; June 13, 215
Edinburgh;Annual Report Presented, June 11, 6, 51.
O'Connor, Mr. J. [Wicklow, W.]
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, 2R. June 18, 696.
Bonded Warehouses;Fortifying Wine, Age, and Quality of Spirits used, June 20, 903.
Dublin Police Court;Allocation of Fines in 1899, June 20, 923.
O'Connor, Mr. T. P. [Liverpool, Scotland]
Belfast Riots;Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, June 14, 458.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R. June 11, 142.
O'Donnell, Mr. T. [Kerry, W.]
Fisheries Commissioners (Ireland);Appointment of Mr. Lane, June 17, 566; June 18, 725, 726.
Intermediate Education, Ireland, Teaching Irish language, etc.;New Rules, June 21, 1151.
National School Teachers;Payment for teaching Irish
Bracklinn, June 13, 293.
Glengariff, June 17, 569.
Trawling in Dingle Bay;Prosecutions, Proposed Alteration of Law, June 17, 568.
United Irish League, Camp, Co. Kerry;Action of Police, June 13, 292.
O'Dowd, Mr. J. [Sligo, S.]
Ballintogher
Postal Arrangements;Increasing Facilities, etc., June 17, 572.
Railway Station;Erection of Passenger and Goods Station, proposed, June 17, 571.
Ballinfull Post Office, Establishment of, proposed, June 18, 729.
Sligo
Incendiary Fires;Crown Proceedings, etc., June 24, 1225.
Magistracy;Area of Adjudication, etc., June 20, 914.
Police Protection;Case of Mr. Phibbs, June 25, 1414.
Ogilby Estate
Delay in Sale of Land to Tenants
Q. Mr. T. W. Russell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 289.
O'Kelly, Mr. J. [Roscommon, N.]
China;Shanghai, Retention of German Garrison, Anglo-German Agreement, etc., June 14, 416.
Gibraltar Harbour Works;Purchase of Spanish Territory, proposed, June 17, 554.
Old Age Pensions
French Chamber, Measure before;Laying Copy on the Table of the House of Commons, etc.
Qs. Mr. W. Redmond, Mr. E. Robertson; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 18, 731.
Hearts of Oak Benefit Society Resolution
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 20, 926.
Old Age Pensions (No. 4) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 49.
Omagh Gas Bill
l. Commons Amendts.,* June 11, 4.
O'Mara, Mr. J. [Kilkenny, S.]
Army Recruits, Statistics;Monthly Return proposed, June 18, 705.
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, 2R., June 18, 690.
Distillation;Seizures of Illicit Distillation, Rewards, etc., Return, June 25, 1410.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 807; June 20, 1000, 1015; June 24, 1251.
Industrial Schools, Ireland
Circular of October, 1898, etc., June 18, 726.
Committals;Legislation, proposed, June 18, 726.
Lascar Seamen on P. and O. Steamers, Accommodation for, etc., June 24, 1321.
Postmen, Ireland;Pay, Percentage of Established Postmen, etc., June 18, 729.
Trawling, Ireland, Prosecutions since 1890;Return, June 20, 922.
Registration of Births and Deaths Bill, 2R., June 17, 678.
Rifles;New Rifle, June 24, 1332.
Youthful Offenders Bill;Date of Introduction, June 20, 904.
O'Neill, Mr. R. T. [Antrim, Mid]
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, 2R., June 18, 689, 690.
Opium Duty
China;Increase in Duty
Q. Sir J. Pease; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 24, 1202.
Orange River Colony
Constitution of Legislative Councils of Transvaal and Orange River Colony, Opportunity for discussing
Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 11, 56.
Financial Position;Sir D. Barbour's Report
Q. Mr. M'Dermott; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 11, 55.
Approval of H.M. Government, etc.
Qs. Mr. Dalziel, Mr. Lough, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 17, 539.
Stock Farms, Establishment of, by the Government
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 52.
"Orders of the Day"
see Parliamentary Procedure.
Ordnance Factories
see Army.
O'Reilly, Sergeant
Action of;Extracting Information from M. Dolan's Son
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 13, 291.
Orr-Ewing, Mr. C. L. [Ayr Burghs]
Prison Administration (Scotland);System of Appointing Governors;Salaries of Chaplains, Medical Officers, etc., June 21, 1113.
O'Shaughnessy, Mr. P. J. [Limerick, W.]
Butter Adulteration;Fixing Standard of Water, Case of J. Simons, etc. June 17, 561.
Deceased Soldiers' Estates;Case of J. Curtin, June 17, 546.
Limerick Disturbances;Case of Dr. Long, June 18, 722, 724.
O'Shee, Mr. J. J. [Waterford, W.]
Census Returns;Date of Issue, etc., June 14, 429.
Dairy Industry, Protection of;Foreign Products sold in England as Irish Products, etc., June 20, 917.
Recruiting in Ireland, Statistics, June 14, 415; June 20, 894.
Rifle Clubs, Ireland;Supplying Clubs with Government Rifles and Ammunition, June 14, 414.
South African War
Dublin Fusiliers;Prisoners rejoining Regiment, Arrears of Pay, June 18, 703.
Prinsloo's, Gen., Force, Surrender of;Detaining as Prisoners of War, June 18, 701.
Vlakfontein Engagement;Strength of British and Boer Forces, June 14, 410.
Otley Gas Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253.
3R.* June 17, 536.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill
c. Com.* June 13, 376.
Con.* June 17, 679.
3R.* June 19, 847.
l. 1R.* June 20, 882.
2R., June 25, 1349.
Oxford and Cambridge Universities
Statutes Presented, June 13, 215, 258.
P
P. and O. Company
Accommodation for Seamen, see Seamen, Crew Accommodation.
Paisley Police and Public Health Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 699.
Con.* June 24, 1190.
Palaces, Royal
Alterations and Drainage Works;Supplementary Estimate
Q. Mr. Whitmore; A. Mr. Douglas, June 18, 721.
Palmer, Mr. W. [Salisbury]
Agricultural Instruction, Transferring Duties from Board of Agriculture to Board of Education, June 24, 1213.
Parcels Post
Buenos Ayres;Stamp Duty on Parcels, Right of imposing Fiscal charge.
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1215.
Parliament
Business of the House, Committee, etc., see those titles.
House of Lords
Accommodation on Occasions of State-Ceremonials;Report from Joint Committee Presented, June 14, 382, 408; June 26, 1584.
Judicial Business, see title House of Lords.
New Peers Introduced;Lord Milner June 13, 213.
Representative Peers for Ireland, see that title.
Sat First
Howard de Walden, Lord, after the death of his father, June 11, 1.
Shute, Lord, after the death of his father, June 18, 681.
Took the Oath
Bowes, Lord, June 14, 377.
Zouche of Haryngworth, Lord, June 18, 681.
Parliamentary Procedure
"Orders of the Day";Government Orders put down first on Tuesday
Q. Mr. Loder; A. Mr. Speaker, June 11, 70.
Ways and Means, see that title.
Parliamentary Time
Distribution of;Irish Grievance
Debate, June 11, 82.
Passengers' Luggage
Examination by Customs Officers at Southampton, etc.
Qs. Mr. Murphy, Mr. P. O'Brien; As. Mr. Ritchie, Mr. Wyndbam, June 20, 903.
Patagonia
Welsh Settlement;Report of Chaplain of H.M.S. "Flora," etc.
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 13, 273.
Paupers
Ireland
Children;Classifying Children under two years of age as sick, etc.
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 294.
Cost of Maintenance;Difference of Cost in various Unions
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1416.
Pease, Mr. A. E. [Yorkshire, Cleveland]
South African Natives, Arrangements for Belief of, June 13, 260.
Pease, Mr. J. A. [Essex, Saffron Walden]
Africa, East;Native Labour, Sir L. Matthew's Recommendations, June 24, 1204.
Business of the House;Facilities for passing the Beer Bill, June 11, 97.
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1246, 1249, 1312.
Slavery in Zanzibar and Pemba;Compensation for Slaves Freed, Abolition of System, June 24, 1204.
Pease, Sir J. [Durham, Barnard Castle]
China;Increase in Opium Duty, June 24, 1202.
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1297; June 25, 1446, 1458, 1499.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 197, 200, 201.
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 857.
Pemba
Slavery;Compensation for Slaves Freed, Abolition of System
Q. Sir J. A. Pease; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 24, 1204.
Pembroke Barracks
Conveying Drainage to Milford Haven, etc.
Q. Mr. Philipps; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 268.
Pembroke Urban District Council (County of Dublin) Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Penal Servitude Acts
Conditional Licences Granted, June 20, 874, 885.
Penrhyn Quarry Dispute
Military Aid to the Civil Power;Catering for Troops, etc.
Qs. Mr. D. A. Thomas, Mr. Lloyd-George; As. Lord Stanley, June 14, 413; Q. Mr. Lloyd-George; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 548.
Percy, Earl [Kensington, S.]
Cremation Bill, Con. June 20, 1552, 1557.
Finance Bill, Com. June 24, 1310.
Mines (Eight Hoars) Bill, Com., June 12, 182, 185.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com. June 26, 1518.
Turkey
Konia;British Vice-Consulate, Abolition of, June 18, 711.
Railway Concessions;Alleged Turko-Russian Agreement, etc., June 18, 709.
Persian Gulf
Trade Report Presented, June 18, 685.
Turkish Railway Concessions, see Turkey.
Perth
Prison, Abandoning and Building Prison at Balmeney
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1125, 1130.
Petersfield and Selsey Gas Bill
l. Report,* June 24, 1174.
Peterson, Crown v.
see Tullamore Quarter Sessions.
Petherton, South
Post Office;Removal to another part of Parish
Q. Mr. Strachey; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 283.
Petitions
Opinion in favour of a Bill was not to be judged by Number of Petitions Presented to Parliament
O. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 75.
Public Petitions Committee, Report Presented, June 13, 258.
Petroleum
Production of and Trade in, in United States and Russia;Return Ordered. June 14, 406;Presented, June 17, 538.
Phibbs, Mr.
Boycotting in County Sligo
Q. Col. M'Calmont; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 920.
Qs. Mr. O'Dowd, Mr. Dillon, Col. M'Calmont; As. Mr. Wyndham, June, 25, 1414.
Philipps, Mr. J. W. [Pembroke]
Pembroke Barracks;Conveying Drainage to Milford Haven, etc., June 13, 268.
South African War;Telegram from Lord Kitchener as to Mounted Men, Remounts, etc., June 25, 1433.
Phthisis
Deaths from, in the Post Office;Return Proposed
Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 718.
Pickard, Mr. B. [York, W. R., Normanton]
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 187.
Pier and Harbour Provisional Order (No. 1) Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 14, 402.
3R.* June 17, 537.
l. 1R.* June 18, 684.
Pier and Harbour Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
l. Com.* June 13, 214.
Report * June 14, 380.
c. 1R.* June 18, 699.
2R.* June 25, 1388.
Piers and Harbour Provisional Orders Confirmation (No. 3) Bill
l. 1R.* June 11, 4.
2R.* June 17, 511.
Piers and Harbours
Scotland;Administration of Congested Districts Board.
Reference to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1138.
(For Particular Piers and Harbours, see their Names.)
Pilkington, Lieut.-Col. R. [Lancashire, Newton]
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 169, 3R., June 19, 825.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com. June 12 176, 190, 193.
Pirie. Mr. D. V. [Aberdeen, N.]
Army Reform;Lord Wolseley and Mr. Cardwell's Scheme of 1870, June 17, 546.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con, June 12, 154, 157; 3R June 19, 815
Food and Drugs Act Prosecutions, Local Public Analysts, etc., June 18, 714.
South African War
Carrington, Gen. Sir F.;Appointment to Command, Selection by War Office, etc., June 17, 543.
Letters, Non-Delivery to Troops;Complaints, June 20, 891.
Platt-Higgins, Mr. F. [Salford, N.]
Stokers for the Navy, Inadequate Number of, June 21, 1059.
Plummer, Mr. W. R. [Newcastle-on-Tyne]
Coal Export Duty, Remission;Coal shipped under Contracts made before April 18, etc., June 21, 1061.
Police
Constabulary, Royal Irish, see that title.
Cost of, in England and Scotland;Return Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 300.
Dublin Metropolitan Police, see Dublin.
Metropolitan Police, see that title.
South African Constabulary, see that title.
Police Superannuation (Scotland) Bill
Petitions. June 12, 147; June 13, 256; June 19, 814; June 25, 1389.
Polling Districts
Harrow-on-the-Hill;Order Presented, June 20, 874, 885.
Warwick, County of;Order Presented, June 13, 215, 257.
Poor Law Officers' Superannuation (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, June 13, 256; June 25 1389.
Poor Rate Collectors
Cork County;Method of making Lodgments, Allocation of Interest, etc.
Q. Mr. Sheehan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 916.
Population of the United Kingdom
see Census.
Portmadoc, Beddgelert, and South Snowdon Railway Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
Portrait Gallery
Annual Report Presented, June 14, 381, 405.
Portugal
Trade Reports Presented, June 13, 214; June 17, 511; June 24, 1184.
Post Office
Postmaster General;Marquess of Londonderry
Representative in Souse of Commons;Mr. Austen Chamberlain.
Canadian Tariffs on British Periodicals, Proposed Reduction of Postal Rates
Q. Mr. Trevelyan; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 715.
Employees
Postal Order Branch;Women Clerks, Petition for Increase of Salary
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain.
Postmen, see that title.
Public Holiday on Queen Victoria's Birthday, Limiting to certain Sections of Employees
Q. Mr. Hay; A. Mr. H. Fisher, June 21, 1068.
Somerset House Officials, etc., Assisting in Sorting in the Evening
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 14, 424.
House to House Letter Delivery Authorised by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his Budget Speech of 1897;Number of Letters Delivered, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. H. Fisher, June 21, 1068; Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1409.
Ireland
Achill;Sunday Delivery
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1219.
Ballinfull;Establishment of Post Office, proposed.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Ballingtogher Postal Arrangements;Increasing Facilities, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 17, 572.
Baltimore Postal Delivery, Improvement of
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 68; June 24, 1220.
Cahirciveen Postal Service to Waterville, Improvement of
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Clones Post Office;Fee Medical Attendance for Officials,
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 923.
Enniscorthy Post Office, Delay in commencing New Buildings, etc.
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 727.
Navan Mail Service;Delays
Q. Mr. P. White; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 296.
Keyham Barton Postal Staff
Q. Mr. Kewley; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1407.
Mail Service, see that title.
Mandat Carte System, Introduction of, proposed
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1216.
Meteorological Reports;Daily Publication at Sub-Post Offices in Agricultural Districts, proposed
Q. Mr. L. Morgan; A. Mr. Hanbury, June 17, 560.
Money Orders, see that title.
Petherton, South;Removal to another part of Parish
Q. Mr. Strachey; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 283.
Phthisis, Deaths from;Return, proposed
Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 718.
Rural Post Offices;Savings Bank and Postal Order Business
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. W. H. Fisher, June 21, 1067.
Scotland:
Mallaig, Conveyance of Mails to and from;Agreement with North British Railway Company
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. W. H. Fisher, June 21, 1067.
Stornoway, see that title.
South African War, Non-delivery of Letters to Troops;Complaints
Qs. Mr. E. Cecil, Mr. Pirie; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 891.
Telegraph Service, see that title.
Telephone Service see that title.
Post Office Packet Service
Vote for, June 24, 1320.
Post Office Savings Bank
Deposits by Cheque, Rule as to clearing Cheque before Acknowledgment
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain. June 25, 1408.
Rural Post Offices
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. H. Fisher, June 21, 1067.
Telegraphic Withdrawals in 1900;Average Cost, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 717.
Postage
Newspapers, see that title.
Postage Stamps
Design and Colour of New Stamps, Approval
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1218.
Perforation;Tendency to tear irregularly
Q. Mr. A. Lee; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 63;
Postal Orders
Salonika Post Office, Refusing to Supply
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1407.
Postmaster General
Marquess of Londonderry.
Postmen
Good Conduct Stripe;Soldiers returned from South Africa
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 17, 562.
Grievances
Bolton Outdoor Postal Service
Q. Mr. Harwood; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1407.
Newton Abbot Postmen's Petition
Q. Mr. Seale-Hayne; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1408.
Ireland;Pay, Percentage of established Postmen, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 729.
Queen Victoria's Funeral Day;Postmen's Extra Pay
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1218.
Potato Spraying
Ireland;Names, Qualifications, etc., of Instructors
Q. Mr. P. O. Brien; A. Mr. Wynd ham, June 17, 565.
Poulton-le-Fylde Gas Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
Report.* June 20, 884.
Con* June 26, 1509.
Poultry Breeding, Scotland
Congested Districts Board Administration, Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1133.
Powell, Sir F. S. [Wigan]
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con. June 17, 532.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con. June 13, 158, 168; 3R., June 19, 828.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1520.
Power, Mr. P. J. (Waterford, E.)
Barrow Drainage Question;Facilities for Discussion, June 11, 100.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 674.
Finance Bill, Com. June 18, 773, 808.
United Irish League Meetings;Action of the Police, June 11, 67.
Walsh's, Mr. P. T., Association with the Land League, etc., June 21, 1075.
"Powerful," H.M.S.
Undergunned
O. Mr. W. Allan, June 14, 485.
Powis, Countess of
Darcyde Knayth, Meynill and Fauconberg, Baronies of;Petition considered by Committee of Privileges, June 25, 1333.
Preservatives in Food
see Food Preservatives.
Prestatyn Water Bill
c. Report,* June 19, 868.
Con.* June 26, 1509.
Pretyman, Mr. E. G.;Civil Lord of the Admiralty [Suffolk, Woodbridge]
"Cressy," H.M.S.;Breakdown of Steering Gear, Report of Inquiry, June 13, 269.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme;Cost of completing Works, June 18, 706.
Naval Brigade;Warrant Officers and South African War Honours, June 18, 706.
Prevention of Corruption (No. 2) Bill
l. Com* June 13, 217.
Report,* June 25, 1345.
"Primrose Hill," Loss of
Inadequately manned, alleged
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 13, 346.
Inquiry
Allowing Relatives of Persons drowned to be represented at
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 14, 419.
Method of Conducting;Complaints as to
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 24, 1207.
Prisons
Borstal Prison, Appropriation of, to Selected Criminal Prisoners;Draft Rule presented, June 26, 1510.
Prisoners between 16 and 21 years;Draft of Special Rules presented, June 26, 1511.
Scotland
Administration;System of Appointing Governors;Visiting Committees, Salaries of Chaplains and Medical Officers, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1113.
Expenses, etc., Vote for, June 21, 1119.
For particular Prisons, see their names.
Visiting Committees;Draft Rule Presented, June 26, 1510.
Private Bill Legislation
Return Presented, June 30, 886.
Private Bill Procedure Scotland
Procedure
Principle of Devolution as contained in the Act;Local Inquiry to be overruled by the House;Mr. Dillon's Opposition to Second Heading of the Arizona Copper Co. Bill
O. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 11, 42.
Referring Bills to Joint Committee of Lords and Commons.
Debate on Arizona Copper Company Bill, June 13, 234.
Re-hearing in Parliament after Local Inquiry;Glasgow Corporation Bill Debate, June 25, 1337.
(for particular Bill, see title of Bill.
Private Bills
Auction Clause;South Metropolitan Gas Bill, Mr. Lough's Amendment, June 11, 10.
Water Bills and the Question of locus standi, see Water Bills.
Private Members' Bills
Government taking over Private Members' Bills;Abuse that might arise in taking over;Controversial Measures passed through a Perfunctory Discussion on Wednesdays, etc.
Statement [Mr. A. J. Balfour], June 11, 74.
Second Readings on Wednesdays and Number of Petitions;Fallacious Test as to Majority in favour of a particular Bill.
O. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 75.
"Starring" Uncontroversial Bills and taking under Government Patronage.
Statement (Mr. A. J. Balfour), June 11, 73.
Os. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, 77.
Privy Council
Judicial Committee;Number of Sittings in 1899 and 1900.
Q. Mr. Blake; A. Sir R. Finlay, June 20, 910.
Return Ordered, June 24, 1195.
Prize Money
China War, 1856&#x2013;1862;Petitions for Inquiry, June 11, 48; June 17, 512.
Navy;Balance remaining unpaid, etc.
Q. Mr. Majendie; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 17, 549.
Pro-Boer Meetings
Queen's Hall;Number of Police Employed, etc.
Qs. Sir J. Stirling-Maxwell, Mr. Malcolm, Mr. E. Robertson; As. Mr. Ritchie, June 21, 1064.
Property
Income Tax Exemptions;Fines on Demise of Land, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Crae; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 17, 555.
Provisional Order Bills
Titles of Bills;Insufficient Identification
Os. Sir J. Brunner; Mr. Speaker, June 14, 388.
Pryce-Jones, Lieut.-Col. E. [Montgomery Boroughs]
Light Railways Act, 1896;Free Advances;Amount remaining available, etc., June 13, 276.
Newtown Urban District Council;Application for Loan for Gas Works refused, etc., June 11, 62.
Public Accounts Committee
Leave given to Witness to attend, June 11, 7; June 14, 382, 408.
Public Health Bill
Petitions, June 24, 1193
Public Income and Expenditure
see Revenue and Expenditure.
Public Libraries Bill
c., 2R.* June 24, 1332.
Memorandum Presented, June 19, 815.
Public Petitions Committee
see Petitions.
Public Records
see Records.
Public Service Examinations
Modern Languages, Encouraging Study of;Proposed Appointment of Committee
Q. Mr. Crombie; A. Mr. A. Balfour, June 11, 68.
Public Worship Regulation Act (1874) Amendment Bill
Petitions, June 21, 1051.
Pupil Teachers
see Education;Teachers.
Purchase of Land (Ireland) Bill
c. Com. and 3R., June 13, 375.
l. 1R.* June 14, 384
2R., June 18, 685.
Com.* and Report,* June 24, 1185.
3R.* June 25, 1350.
Purvis, Mr. R. [Peterborough]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1521.
Business of the House;Facilities for Passing the Beer Bill, June 11, 96.
Q
Queen Anne's Bounty Board
Constitution;Joint Committee of Inquiry
Lords named of the Committee, June 14, 384, 407.
Members Nominated (Commons), June 12, 211; June 13, 331.
Message from the Commons, June 18, 685.
Motion [Marquess of Salisbury], June 11, 8.
Queen Victoria's Birthday
Post Office Employees' Holidays, see Post Office.
Queen Victoria's Funeral
Postmen's Extra Pay
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1218.
Queensland
Asiatic Labour Bill;Refusal of Royal Assent
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 14, 416.
Questions in the House
Member copying almost verbatim question of which another Member had given Notice
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Speaker, June 25, 415.
Right of asking questions
O. Mr. J. Redmond, June 11, 87
Speaker's Rulings, see Speaker.
R
Raglan, Lord;Under Secretary of State for War.
Army
Army Corps Organisation, Constitution of, June 13, 229.
Reform and Reorganisation, Government Proposals;Inadequate Terms offered to Recruits, etc., June 25, 1379.
Railway (Labour Disputes) Conciliation and Arbitration Bill
c. 1R.* June 25, 1422.
Railways
Accidents
Prevention of Accidents Rules, 1901, Notification of;Proposed Standard Brake
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, June 17, 559.
Return Presented, June 25, 1344, 1390.
Automatic Couplings;Carrying out of the Act
Os. Mr. Bryce, Mr. G. Balfour, June 13, 370, 371.
Cycles, see that title.
Foreign Countries, see their names.
Ireland
Ballintogher;Erection of Passenger and Goods Station, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 17, 571.
Clare;South and West Clare Railways, Taxing Electoral Divisions of Dromane, etc., Proposed Remission
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 917.
Fermoy and Cork Direct Railway, Construction of;Date of Commencement
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. W. A. Fisher, June 21, 1079.
Killaglin Line;Baronial guarantee, Increase in
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1221.
Ulster;Fruit Carriage, Complaints against Great Northern Railway Company
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 724.
Light Railways
Act, 1896;Free Advances, Amount of Treasury Grant remaining available, etc.
Q. Col. Pryce-Jones; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 13, 276.
Cycles;Conveyance of;Making Provision for, etc., proposed.
Q. Mr. Lough; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 13, 277.
Orders Presented, June 14, 381, 405.
Telegraph Service;Value of Services rendered by Post Office in 1900 and 1901.
Q. Mr. Lonsdale; A. Mr. Chamberlain, June 13, 281.
Third Class Season Tickets, Issue of proposed.
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 25, 1403.
Workmen's Trains, see that title.
Rasch, Maj. F. C. [Essex, Chelmsford.]
Army Contracts;Government Orders for Kharki Cloth, Wrench v. Langworthy Bros. &amp; Co., June 20, 895.
Richmond Park Gatekeepers, Appointment of;Claims of old Soldiers, June 17, 563.
South African War;Refuge Camps, Mortality at Johannesburg, June 13, 264.
Rates
see Local Taxation.
Re-afforesting
Ireland, see that title;Afforesting.
Reay, Lord
Justices' Jurisdiction (London) Bill, 2R. June 25, 1349.
Records
Admiralty;Documents of not sufficient public value to justify preservation;Schedule Presented, June 24, 1184, 1195.
Recruits
see Army.
Red Sea
Lights, Construction of, etc.
Q. Sir J. Fergusson; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 24, 1205.
Reddy, Mr. M. [King's County, Birr]
Constabulary, Royal Irish
O'Reilly, Sergeant, Action of;Extracting Information from M. Dolan's Son, June 13, 291.
Retirements on Pensions during last twelve months, June 14, 426.
Moystown Arson Case;Holding special Court, alleged, June 13, 292.
Tullamore Quarter Sessions;Judge discharging Jury, alleged Fine, etc., June 13, 291.
Redmond, Mr. John [Waterford]
Arizona Copper Company, Limited, Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 11, 45.
Belfast Riots
Attacks on Roman Catholic Procession, etc., June 14, 430, 431, 433, 450, 451, 453.
Shipbuilding Yards, Police Patrolling Yards, etc., June 18, 732, 733, 734.
Business of the House;Neglected Irish Interests, Necessity for Devolution, Encroachment on Private Members' Time, etc., June 11, 82.
Course of Business;Supply, June 24, 1227, 1228.
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Belfast Constabulary Equipment, June 24, 1223.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 26, 1577.
Distillation, Illicit;Seizures, Rewards, etc., Return, June 25, 1411.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 11, 133.
Limerick Disturbances;Case of Dr. Long, June 18, 723.
Purchase of Land (Ireland) Bill, Com., June 13, 375.
Redmond, Mr. W. [Clare, E.]
Ballyvaughan Fishing Industry;Assisting Fishermen, etc., June 17, 564.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 865.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 769, 777, 803, 806.
Highlands of Scotland, Mail Service;Steamer, "Clydesdale," etc., June 24, 1324.
Imperial Court of Appeal, Establishment of, June 17, 552.
Crown Colony Representatives, June 24, 1201.
Meat, Poisonous Tinned Meat at Fermoy Barracks, June 14, 412.
Merchant Shipping;Foreign Officers on British Ships, etc., June 21, 1061, 1002.
National Democratic League Meeting at Birmingham Proposed;Chief Constable prohibiting, June 25, 1405.
Old Age Pensions in France;Laying Copy of the Labour Pensions Bill on the Table of the House, June 18, 731.
"Primrose Hill" Inquiry
Allowing Relatives of Persons Drowned to be Represented at Court of Inquiry, June 14, 419, 420.
Method of Conducting;Complaints, June 24, 1207.
Queensland Asiatic Labour Bill;Refu al of Royal Assent, June 14, 416.
Rifles, New Rifles;Placing Specimen in Tea Room of House of Commons, June 24, 1332.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against, June 18, 707.
Seamen
Able-bodied Seamen and the Manning of Merchant Ships;Loss of the "Primrose Hill," etc., June 13, 346, 348, 350, 354, 372.
Lascars on P. &amp; O. Steamers, Accommodation, etc., June 24, 1212, 1325.
South African War
Boer Prisoners;Internment in India, Unhealthiness of Situation, June 13, 261; June 20, 890; June 21, 1052.
Horses, Transport Arrangements, etc., June 25, 1429.
Refuge Camps
Condition of Camps, Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality among, etc., June 17, 610.
Permission to leave Camp, June 17, 542, 543.
Shooting of Burghers at Pretoria;Breach of Oath of Neutrality, June 14, 408.
Transvaal;Financial Condition, Sir D. Barbour's Report, June 17, 540.
Reed, Sir E. J. [Cardiff]
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1280.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Design, etc., June 14, 492.
Reeves' Estate
Difficulties of Tenants disposing of their Holdings
Q. Mr. E. Barry; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1224.
Reformatories and Industrial Schools
Ireland
Committals;Legislation proposed
Qs. Mr. O'Mara; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 18, 726.
Dublin;Establishment of Schools proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndhain, June 13, 288.
Lord Lieutenant's Circular of Oct., 1898
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 726.
Registration of Births and Deaths Bill
c. Intro., June 13, 329.
2R., June 17, 678.
Reid, Sir R. T. [Dumfries Burghs]
Belfast Riots;Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, June 14, 457.
Religion
Declarations of Heads of States on Accession touching Relieion;Return
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 289.
Renshaw, Mr. C. B. [Renfrew, W.]
Arizona Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons proposed, June 13, 248.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 19, 859, 860, 864; June 26, 1551, 1552, 1560.
Education, Scotland;Training Colleges Mr. Carnegie's Gift, etc., June 21, 1088.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 149, 152, 162, 164, 172; 3R., June 10, 836.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 663.
Renwick, Mr. G. [Newcastle-on-Tyne]
Coal;Export Duty, Proposed Reduction of Duty on Small Coal, June 18, 713.
Yeomanry, Imperial in South Africa;Inducing Men to join Yeomanry Regiments at home, June 11, 54.
Representative Peers far Ireland
Barrington, Viscount, June 11, 1; June 17, 509; June 20, 869.
Gosford, Earl of, June 11, 1; June 18, 681; June 20, 869.
"Repulse," H.M.S.
Fatality in Lough Swilly;Testing Fittings at Chatham
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 898.
Revenue and Expenditure;Finance System, etc.
Irish Taxation Grievance, see Ireland-Budget Proposals.
Return Ordered of Net Public Income and Expenditure, etc., June 14, 407.
War Expenditure, see South African War
Ways and Means, see that title.
Rhyl Improvement Bill
c. Report*, June 14, 402.
Con.* June 24, 1190.
Richards, Mr. H. C. [Finsbury, E.]
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill, 2R., June 14, 386.
Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1025.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 190.
Richmond Gas Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 3.
Report,* June 21, 1021.
Richmond Park
Gatekeepers, appointment of;Claims of old Soldiers
Q. Major Rasch; A. Mr. A. Douglas, June 17, 563.
Oaks;Planting Oak Saplings
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Douglas, June 18, 720.
Rifle Clubs
Ireland;Supplying Clubs with Government Rifles and Ammunition
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 414.
Rifles
Automatic Rifles, Issue of
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 893.
New Rifles
Manufacture of New Rifles, Space required for, etc.
Os. Mr. Weir, Lord Stanley, June 24, 1333.
Placing Specimen in Tea Room of House of Commons
Os. Col. Nolan, Mr. W. Redmond, Lord Stanley, June 24, 1331, 1332.
Ripon, Marquess of
Leeds Corporation Water Bill;Locus Standi Question, June 24, 1180.
Ripon Corporation Bill
l. Report,* June 17, 511.
3R.* June 21, 1023.
c. 1R.* June 24, 1193.
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. C. T.;Secretary of State for the Home Department [Croydon]
Birkenhead Licensing Case;Executrix of Deceased Publican not a licensed Person;Casus omissus in Licensing Act, June 24, 1208.
Child Labour, Employment of Children of School Age;Interdepartmental Inquiry, June 18, 720.
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill;Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1039.
Coal Mines, Adding Explosives to Special List;Order in Council, Delays, etc., June 13, 274.
Customs;Examination of Passengers' Luggage at Southampton, etc., June 20, 903.
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 11, 109, 125, 138; June 17, 634, 649.
Lilly white, C, Wrongful Arrest on Charge of Murder, June 25, 1404.
Metropolitan Police Stations, Telephonic Communication between, June 20, 904.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com. June 12, 180, 182.
National Democratic League Meeting at Birmingham;Chief Constable prohibiting, June 25, 1404, 1405.
"Primrose Hill," loss of;Inquiry, June 24, 1207.
Allowing Relatives of Persons drowned to be represented at Court of Inquiry, June 14, 419, 420.
Queen's Hall. Pro-Boer Meeting;Number of Police employed, etc., June 21, 1065.
Scotland Yard Staff;Salaries, June 25, 1403.
Streets, Breaking-up of London Streets;Inconvenience caused by, etc., June 13, 280.
Wales;Mines
Collieries in South Wales
Fatal Accidents;Disparity in Death Rate, June 17, 558.
Mortality among Young People, Increase of, June 17, 557.
Inspectors of Mines;Appointment of Welsh-speaking Inspector, etc., June 11, 60; June 13, 274; June 14, 421.
Walsall Watch Committee and Licensing Prosecutions;Constable consulting Town Clerk before taking out Summonses, June 18, 714.
Wapping Street Disturbance;Absence of Police, etc., June 17, 556.
Youthful Offenders Bill, Intro., June 20 927.
Roads
Ireland;Employment of Direct Labour-Provisional Order, Date of coming into Operation, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 14, 428.
Qs. Mr. Cullinan, Mr. Sheehan; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 921.
Scotland, Construction of Roads;Congested Districts Board Administration.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1133, 1139.
Roberts, Mr. B. [Carnarvonshire, Eifion]
South African War.
Paarl District;Suppression of Newspapers, etc., June 13, 265.
Refuge Camps, Condition of;Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality among, etc., June 17, 596.
Zulu Cattle Raiding under British Military Authority alleged, June 13, 266.
Roberts, Mr. H. [Denbighshire, W.]
Birkenhead Licensing Case, Executrix of a Deceased Publican, not a Licensed Person,;casus omissus in Licensing Act, June 24, 1208.
China
British Garrison;Composition of Permanent Garrison, June 17, 551.
German Troops remaining in China, Strength of, etc., June 13, 270.
India, Frontier Province, Administration, etc.;laying Papers and Map on the Table, June 13, 271.
Wales
County Schools and the Urban District Authorities, June 24, 1214.
Intermediate Schools;Urban District Council's Share in Control, etc., June 21, 1071.
Robertson, Mr. E. [Dundee]
Brechin Intimidation Case;Sentence on James Bean, June 21, 1071.
Civil List Bill, 3R., June 18, 750.
Coal Export Duty;Gibraltar, Exemption of, proposed, June 24, 1205.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme, Decision of the Government as to, June 25, 1421.
Naval Works Bill;Date of Introduction, June 14, 415.
Old-Age Pensions;Colonial Acts, Laying on the Table, June 18, 731.
Queen's Hall, Pro-Boer Meeting;Police, Number employed, etc., June 21, 1065.
South African War;Army Contracts in South Africa;Amount paid and owing, June 21, 1056.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht;Cost, Failure of Type, etc., June 14, 478, 488, 497.
Robson, Mr. W. S. P. [South Shields]
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1275, 1296; June 25, 1449.
Rodgers' Patent Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
Roman Catholic University, Ireland
see Ireland;University Education.
Roman Catholicism
King's Declaration against
Australian Federal Cabinet in favour of Revision, alleged
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 18, 707.
Committee
Names of Members, etc.
Qs. Col. Nolan, Mr. W. Johnston; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 299.
Lords named of the Committee, June 13, 230.
Report, June 25, 1345.
Declarations of Heads of States of Germany, France, etc.
Q. Col. Nolan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 298.
Petitions, June 18, 685; June 20, 874; June 24, 1185; June 25, 1344.
Ropner, Col. R. [Stockton]
Seamen;Able-bodied Seamen and the Manning of Merchant Ships, Powers of the Board of Trade, Loss of the "Primrose Hill," etc., June 13, 351.
Ross and Cromarty
Congestion in, Settling the People on the Land;Non-acquisition of Land by Congested District Board.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 20, 911.
Royal Grants
Civil List Bill, see that title.
Royal Irish Constabulary
see Constabulary, Royal Irish.
Royal Yacht
see "Victoria and Albert."
Rugby Water and Improvement Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 20, 872.
3R.* June 25, 1335.
Rural Post Offices
see Post Office.
Russell. Mr. T. W. [Tyrone, S.]
Belfast and Northern Counties Railway Bill, 2R. June 18, 695.
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con., June 17, 533.
Cremation Bill, Con., June 26, 1554.
Land Commission Report, Date of Presenting to the House, June 25, 1419.
Land Purchase, Ireland;Number of Tenant Purchasers under Various Acts, June 25, 1413.
Ogilby Estate;Delay in sale of Land to tenants, June 13, 289.
Russia
Mineral and Metallurgical Industries;Report Presented, June 20, 873.
Thibet, Mission from, to solicit Protection against British Encroachment", alleged
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 21, 1060.
Trade Reports Presented, June 11, 6.
Turkey;Railway Concessions, Turko-Russian Agreement, alleged
Qs. Lord E. Fitzmaurice, Earl Percy; As. Visc. Cranborne, June 18, 709.
S
Saccharine
Sugar Duty, Budget Proposals;Finance Bill Debate, June 20, 1008.
Sadler, Col. S. A. [Middlesbrough]
Rifle Practice- Supplying Volunteers with gratuitous Ammunition, etc., June 13, 268.
St. Bartholomew's Hospital Bill
c., 2R., June 24, 1187.
St. George, Botolph Lane
Parish of;City Charities, Payment of Curate, etc.
Q. Mr. Tomlinson; A. Mr. G. Boscawen, June 21, 1066.
St. Helena
Report for 1900 Presented, June 20, 873, 885.
Sale of Food and Drugs Acts
Board of Agriculture Report, June 21, 1025.
Sale of Intoxieating Liquors on Sunday Bill
Petitions, June 11, 49; June 13, 256; June 17, 538; June 18, 699; June 19, 814; June 21, 1051.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill
c. Com., June 26, 1512.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill
Facilities for passing;Statement, Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 73, 75.
Os. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, 79; Mr. Tritton, 94; Mr. Crombie, 97; Mr. R. Lucas, 98; Mr. E. J. C. Morton, 98.
Petitions, June 11, 50; June 12, 147; June 13, 257; June 14, 404; June 17, 538; June 18, 700; June 19, 814; June 20, 885; June 21, 1051; June 24, 1193; June 25, 1389; June 26, 1510.
Second Headings on Wednesdays, Number of Petitions Presented;Fallacious Test as to Majority in favour of a particular Bill
O. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 11, 75.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 50; June 12, 147; June 13, 257; June 14, 404; June 17, 538; June 18, 700; June 19, 814; June 26, 1510.
Salford Corporation Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 18, 682.
3R.* June 24, 1174.
c. 1R.* June 25, 1389.
Salisbury, Marquess Of;Prime Minister and Lord Privy Seal
Convocations of the Clergy Bill, 2R., June 13, 219.
Demise of the Crown Bill, 2R., June 17, 526.
Drunkards' Bill, 3R., June 20, 876.
Licensing Bill, 3R., June 20, 879.
Queen Anne's Bounty Board, Constitution of;Joint Committee of Inquiry, June 11, 8; June 14, 384.
Salonika
British Post Office;Refusing to Supply Postal Orders
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 25, 1407.
Sassoon, Sir E. [Hythe]
India;Banking and Commerce, Sale of Bills and Telegraphic Transfers, Difference in Rates, Reduction in Impost proposed, June 17, 551.
Saunderson, Col. Rt. Hon. E. J. [Armagh, N.]
Belfast Riots;Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, June 14, 461.
Savings Banks
Post Office Savings Bank, see that title.
Trustee Savings Bank, see that title.
School Board Electorate (Scotland) Bill
Petition, June 25, 1390.
School Libraries
see Education;Libraries.
Schwann, Mr. C. E. [Manchester, N.]
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 962.
India;Famine Commission Report, June 11, 59.
South African War;Civil Medical Officers, Releasing from Active Service, proposed, June 11, 52.
Science and Art Directory Presented,
June 11, 6; June 12, 148.
Scotland
Secretary;Rt. Hon. Lord Balfour of Burleigh.
Under-Secretary;Sir C. Scott-Moncrieff.
Lord-Advocate;Rt. Hon. A. G. Murray.
Solicitor-General;Mr. C. Scott Dickson.
Applecross Fishery;Erection of Pier at Annat, proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 14, 425.
Art Galleries, Expenditure on, Loan Collection from South Kensington, Purchase of Pictures, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1106.
Avoch Harbour, Repair of
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 13, 284.
Barra, Island of;Application for Land for Cottars and Crofters from Lady Gordon Cathcart, Disturbances arising out of Refusal
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1141.
Bee-keeping;Congested Districts Board Administration
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1133.
Brechin, see that title.
Burgh Auditors;Powers of Secretary for Scotland to appoint
Q. Col. Denny; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 11, 65.
Carnegie's, Mr. A., Gift for Benefit of Universities
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply. June 21, 1082, 1085, 1087, 1092, 1093, 1103
Cattle and Live Stock Breeding;Administration by the Congested Districts Board
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131.
Census
Report Presented, June 14, 406; June 17, 512
Return of Valuation, Population, etc., of Counties and Burghs
Q. Sir J. Leng, A. Mr. C. S. Dickson, June 24, 1219.
Congested Districts Board, see that title.
Cremation, see Cremation Bill.
Edinburgh, see that title.
Education;for collective heading see Education.
Fines for Small Offences, Payments by Instalments, proposed.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June, 21, 1124.
Glasgow, see that title.
Highlands and Islands, see that title.
Inebriates Act, carrying out of the Act.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1120, 1129.
Judicial Statistics;Returns from Sasine Office, alleged omission.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 18, 720.
Juvenile and Semi-Adult Prisoners;Special place for separate Treatment required
Reference to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1120, 1128.
Killilan Deer Forest, Extension of;alleged clearing and afforesting of Faddock Farm., etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 13, 286.
Land;Settling Crofters and Cottars on the land, congested Districts Board Administration
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131, 1139, 1144, 1146.
Lewis, Island of;Croir Farm, etc.
References to in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1131, 1147.
Local Taxation Account;Secondary and Technical Education, see Education;Scotland.
Maraig Burial Ground;Overcrowding, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. G. Murray, June 11, 64.
Medical Officers of Health
Districts other than Burghs, number appointed, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 20, 910.
Highlands and Islands;Appointment of Officers without Public Health Diploma
Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 14, 425.
Number of;Number holding Public Health Diploma, etc.
Qs. Mr. Weir; As. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 11, 64; June 13, 287.
National Gallery, see title Edinburgh.
Perth Prison, Abandoning and Building Prison at Balminy.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1125, 1130.
Piers and Harbours, Construction of;Administration of the Congested Districts Board
References to in Debate in Com, of Supply, June 21, 1138.
Police, Cost of, in England and Scotland;Return
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Chamberlain, June 13, 300.
Poultry Breeding;Congested Districts Board Adminstration
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1133.
Prisoners
Classification of
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1120, 1127.
Treatment of Sick Prisoners
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1118, 1125, 1128.
Prisons
Administration;System of appointing Governors;Visiting Committees, Salaries of Chaplains and Medical Officers, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1113.
(For Particular Prisons, see their names.)
Procurators Fiscal;Appointment at Linlithgow
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1134, 1136.
Roads, Construction of;Administration of Congested Districts Board
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1133, 1139.
Ross and Cromarty, Congestion in;Non-acquisition of Land by Congested Districts Board, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 20, 911.
Sasine Office, Edinburgh, see Edinburgh.
Seaforth Highlanders, Return from Egypt;Insufficient Steamer Accommodation to Stornoway
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, June 21, 1057.
Secretary's Office;Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, June 21, 1130.
Shader Cove;Petition for Removal of Overhanging Rock
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. J. Murray, June 13, 285.
Sheriffs' Salaries;Proposed Increase
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 905.
Sheriffs' Substitute;Lanark Appointment
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1134, 1135.
Stornoway, see that title.
Training Colleges, etc.;University System and Training College System, Comparative Merits, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1082, 1088, 1091, 1094, 1095, 1999, 1100, 1103.
Scotland Yard
Staff;Salaries, Increase, proposed
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 25, 1403.
Scott, Mr. C. P. [Lancashire, Leigh]
South African War;Refuge Camps
Compulsory Detention in, etc., June 21, 1053.
Condition of Camps, Treatment of Women and Children, Mortality among, etc., June 17, 602.
Mortality Statistics, etc., June 20, 887.
Number of Persons, in, Dietary, etc., June 17, 541, 543.
Sea Fisheries
Committee of Inquiry, Appointment of,
Q. Mr. Layland-Barratt; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 21, 1062.
Seaforth Militia
Return from Egypt;Insufficient Steamer Accommodation to Stornoway
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, June 21, 1057.
Seamen;Merchant Shipping
Able-bodied Seamen and the Manning of Merchant Ships;Proof of Service, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 13, 345.
Bonuses, System of the Shipping Federation
O. Mr. J. Burns, June 13, 356.
Boy Sailors' Scheme, Working of,
O. Mr. C. M'Arthur, June 13, 366.
Continuous Discharge System,
O. Col. Ropner, June 13, 353.
Crew Accommodation;Lascars on P. and O. Steamers
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 24, 1322.
Mr. Justice Mathew's Judgment
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 24, 1212.
Crimping in American and other Ports
O. Mr. J. Burns, June 13, 355.
Food and Accommodation
Committee of Inquiry
Q. Lord Muskerry; A. Earl of Dudley, June 18, 687.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 13 361.
" Manchester Corporation," Case of
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. G Balfour, June 24, 1210.
"South Esk";Crew's Complaints
Q. Mr. Joicey; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 25, 1400.
Foreigners superseding British Seamen
O. Mr. C. M Arthur, June 13, 365.
Number, Ages, and Ratings;Return
Q. Sir Charles Dilke; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 21, 1081.
Pension Scheme, proposed
O. Mr. C. M'Arthur, June 13, 368.
Supply of Qualified Seamen;Failure of the Boy Sailors' Scheme
O. Mr. C. M'Arthur, June 13, 366.
Season Tickets
Third Class Season Tickets, proposed
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 25, 1403.
Seely, Mr. C. H. [Lincoln]
"Mongolian" Transport to South Africa, etc., June 14, 412.
Shader Cove
Petition for Removal of Overhanging Rock
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 13, 285.
Shanballymore
United Irish League;Police tearing down Notice of Meeting, alleged
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 915.
Shanghai
see China.
Shannon Water and Electric Power Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 682.
Sharkey, Sergeant
Case of
Q. Mr. Mooney; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1074.
Shaw, Mr. C. [Stafford]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1478.
Teachers, Dismissal of;Right of Appeal, Date of introducing Bill, June 17, 563.
Shaw, Mr. T. [Hawick Burghs]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons, June 13, 232, 239.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 161.
Sheehan, Mr. [Cork, Mid]
Cork Co.
Land Purchase;J. Cronin's Farms, Insufficiency of Purchase Money to redeem Superior Interests, etc., June 13, 297.
Poor Rate Collectors;Method of making Lodgments, Allocation of Interest, etc., June 20, 916.
Direct Labour, Employment of;Formulating Schemes in anticipation of Provisional Order, etc., June 20, 921.
Fisheries, Ireland;Inspectors, Appointment of Mr. Lane, June 20, 919.
Labourers' Cottages, Ahinah;rejection of J. Desmond's application, June 14, 427.
Sheffield Corporation Bill
c. Report,* June 26, 1585.
Sheriffs
Scotland;Proposed Increase of Salaries
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 905.
Sherries
Royal Cellars, Sale of Wine;Payment of Duty
Qs. Mr. M'Dermott, Mr. P. O'Brien; As. Sir M. H. Beach; June 21, 1060.
Shipley Improvement Bill
c. Report,* June 20, 884.
Con.* June 26, 1509.
Shipping
see Merchant Shipping.
Shipwrights
see Navy.
Shireoaks, Laughton, and Maltby Railway Bill
l. 1R.* June 11, 6.
2R.* June 20, 870.
Shops Bill
Petitions, June 11, 50.
Shops (Early Closing) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 7; June 14, 382; June 17, 512.
Shrewsbury Gas Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253.
Con. * June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1189.
l. Commons Amendts.* June 25, 1336.
Shute Lord
Sat first in Parliament after Death of his Father, June 18, 681.
Sidmouth, Visc.
Gibraltar Harbour Works Scheme-Committee Report, June 17, 526.
Sierra Leone
Report for 1900 Presented, June 25, 1344, 1390.
Sinclair, Mr. L. [Essex, Romford]
Animals;Public drinking places, Providing with standpipes and taps, June 14, 423.
Contagious Diseases, Animals-Compulsory Slaughter, Higher Rate Compensation proposed, June 14, 423.
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1249.
Singh, Magan
Petition for Redress of Grievance, June 17, 538.
Slave Trade
see titles Zanzibar and Pemba.
Sligo, County Sligo, etc.
Boycotting;Case of Mr. Phibbs
Q. Col. M'Calmont; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 920: Qs. Mr. O'Dowd, Mr. Dillon, Col. M'Calmont; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1414.
County Council Printing Contract;Accepting Highest Tender
Os. Lord Muskerry; Earl of Denbigh; June 14, 383.
Incendiarism;Proceedings by the Crown
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 24, 1225.
Magistracy;Area of Adjudication, Proposed Extension, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 914.
Small Holdings (Ireland) Bill
c., 1R.* June 14, 467.
Smethwick Corporation Bill
l. Report,* June 13, 213.
3 E.* June 20, 871.
c., 1R.* June 21, 1050.
Smith, Mr. Parker [Lanark, Partick]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 11, 41.
Joint Committee of Lords and Commons proposed, June 13, 230.
Art Galleries, Scotland;Loan Collection, etc., June 21, 1109.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con, June 12, 151, 159, 170; 3R., June 19, 841.
Meat, Poisonous Tinned Meat at Fermoy Barracks, June 14, 412.
Prison Administration, Scotland;Appointment of Governors, Trained Nurse Warders;Hospital Accommodation to Duke Street Prison, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 21, 1116.
Soares, Mr. E. J. [Devon, Barnstaple]
Wrecks;Lack of Communication between Admiralty and Board of Trade, etc., Wrecks off Devonshire Coast, etc., June 13, 344.
Soldiers
Conditions of Army Service, see Army.
Employment of Soldiers on leaving the Army;Places under Government available, etc.
Os. Duke of Bedford, June 25, 1356.
Flogging of Soldier on Transport Ship
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1393.
Liability for Maintenance of Parents
Q. Mr. Delany; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 893.
Solicitor General
Sir E. Carson.
Solicitor-General for Scotland
Mr. C. Scott Dickson.
Solicitors Bill
c., 1R.* June 21, 1081.
South African Constabulary
Service outside the Transvaal, etc., Force available for;Charge upon Imperial Exchequer
Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 18, 703.
South African Land Settlement
Report of Commission;Laying on the Table
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 17, 540.
South African Settlement
Stock Farms, Establishment of, by the British Government
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 52.
South African War
Army Contracts in South Africa;Amounts paid and owing,
Q. Mr. E. Robertson; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1056.
Beer Rations on Transports from South Africa, etc.
Qs. Mr. Llewellyn, Mr. Taylor; As. Lord Stanley, June 18, 705.
Beyers, Gen., see subheading Wilson's Operation.
Boer Forces, Strength of
Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 889.
Armed Boers in Cape Colony,
Q. Mr. Lloyd-George; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 1391.
Boer Prisoners, see subheading Prisoners.
Boer Women and Children
Provision for;Negotiations with Boer Leaders
Q. Mr. Lloyd-George; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1055.
Refuge Camps, see that subheading.
Carrington, Gen. Sir F.;Appointment to Command, Selection by War Office, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 17, 543.
Cattle Raiding by Zulus, see subheading Zulu Cattle Raiding.
Concentration Camps, see subheading Refuge Camps.
Cost of the War, see subheading Expenditure, Ways and Means, etc.
Court Martial Sentences
Revision of, etc.
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 890.
Statistics of Imprisonment, etc.;Return,
Q. Dr. Macnamara; A. Lord Stanley, June 11, 55.
Destruction of Property, etc., see subheading, Farm Burning.
Dublin Fusiliers;Prisoners re-joining Regiment, Arrears of Pay, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 703.
Expenditure;Ways and Means, etc.
Carrying on the War without appealing to Parliament for Sanction of further Expenditure
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 25, 1392.
Financial Condition of the Transvaal, etc., Sir D. Bar hour's Report, see title Transvaal.
Transvaal Mines, Taxation.
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 24, 1195.
Weekly Cost of the War, Maintenance of Concentration Camps, etc.
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1392.
False War News, see subheading War News.
Farm Burning.
Roberts's, Lord, Reports and Correspondence with Gen. Botha;Laying on the Table.
Q. Mr. Lloyd-George; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 51.
Bundle, Gen., Action of, in Orange River Colony;Blowing up Mills, etc.
Qs. Mr. Dillon, Mr. Labouchere, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Brodrick. June 13, 262.
Flogging Soldier on board Transport Ship
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1393.
Honours;Naval Brigade, see that sub-heading.
Horses
"Cervona," Horse Transport;Horses thrown overboard alleged to be suffering from Glanders
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 1056.
Number obtained in South Africa;Report
Q. Col. Legge; A. Lord Stanley, June 11, 54, 55.
Supply of Remounts, etc.
Debate on Consolidated Fund Resolution, June 25, 1427.
Transport-Statistics, Cost, etc.
Q. Sir J. B. Maple; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 264.
Invalided Soldiers, Treatment of;Examination of Patients by Medical Boards, Detention at Wynberg, etc.
Q. Sir E. Lees; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 889.
King's Royal Rifles;Second Battalion returned to India;Refunding Outfit Expenses, etc.
Q. Mr. Mansfield; A. Lord Stanley, June 18, 703.
Letters, Non-delivery to Troops;Complaints
Qs. Mr. E. Cecil, Mr. Pirie; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 891.
Medical Volunteer Officers, Releasing from Service
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 52.
Natal;Removal of Restrictions on British Owners of Farms
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 25, 1391.
Natives;Compensation for losses of Cattle, etc.
Q. Mr. A. Pease; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 13, 260.
Q. Mr. Lloyd-George; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 14, 409.
Naval Brigade;Warrant Officers, War Honours
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Pretyman, June 18, 706.
Newspapers, Suppression of, in the Paarl District, alleged
Q. Mr. B. Roberts; A. Mr. Brodrick, June, 13, 265.
Position of Affairs
Q. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 258.
Postmen and Porters returning from Active Service;Good Conduct Stripe, proposed
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 17, 562.
Prinsloo's, Gen., Force, Surrender of;Detaining as Prisoners of War
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 18, 701.
Prisoners;Boer Prisoners
India, Internment in;Unhealthiness of Ahmednagar
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Lord G. Hamilton, June 13, 261; June 20, 890.
Qs. Mr. Channing, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Lord G. Hamilton, June 21, 1052.
Prinsloo's, Gen., Force, Surrender of;Detaining as Prisoners of War
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 18, 701.
Repatriation, Conditions of
Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 13, 259.
Punishment of Soldiers for Breach of Military Law;Statistics
Q. Dr. Macnamara; A. Lord Stanley, June 11, 55.
Refuge Camps
Bloemfontein;Health of Children, Medical Officer's Report
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1055.
Children, Total Number of;School Accommodation
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1053.
Compulsory Detention in, Relaxation of Regulations, etc.
Q. Mr. C. P. Scott; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1053.
Condition of Camps, Treatment of Women and Children, etc.
Motion (Mr. Lloyd-George) June 17, 573.
Dietary, Improvement of, etc.
Qs. Mr. Flynn, Mr. Lloyd-George; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 889.
Instruction of Children, Facilities for etc.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1053.
Johannesburg, Mortality at
Qs. Mr. Dillon, Mr. H. Lewis, Major Rasch; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 263.
Ministers of Religion, Permission to visit, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 24, 1196.
Mortality Statistics, Weekly Returns;Number of Deaths in April and May, etc.
Qs. Mr. C. P. Scott, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 887.
Number and Situation of Refuge Camps, etc.;Dietary, Mortality Statistics, Permission to leave Camp, etc.
Qs. Mr. J. Ellis, Mr. C. P. Scott, Mr. Lloyd-George, Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 17, 540.
Qs. Mr. C. P. Scott, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1053.
Overcrowding;Proposed New Camps, Women separated from their Children, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 18, 700.
Reservists returned home;Detention at Aldershot
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. A. Brodrick, June 20, 892.
Rundle's, Gen., Operations;Farm Burning, see that sub-heading.
Shooting of Burghers at Pretoria;Breach of Oath of Neutrality
Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 14, 408.
Spion Kop, Survey of;Laying before Parliament proposed
Q. Mr. H. Heaton; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 411.
Transport Service, see that title.
Typhoid Fever;Deaths among the Troops Number of Cases, etc.
Q. Sir W. Foster; Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1393.
Vlakfontein Engagement;Strength of British and Boer Forces
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 14, 410.
Volunteers
Casualties among
Os. Duke of Bedford, Lord Raglan, June 25, 1364, 1384.
Mounted Infantry, Members of Original Service Companies Serving as;Rate of Pay
Q. Mr. Hammond; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 267.
Number Joining Imperial Yeomanry
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Lord Stanley, June 24, 1197.
War News;False News, Censorship of;Gen. Beyer's Commando Surprise, Telegram of Inquiry stopped by Censor, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 14, 701.
Warrant Officers, see sub-heading Naval Brigade.
Water Kloof and Colesberg Actions, Casualties, Capture of Horses, etc.,
Q. Mr. Lloyd-George; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1392.
Wilson's, Gen., Operations;Telegram of Inquiry stopped by Censor
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 14, 701.
Yeomanry, Imperial
Number of Volunteers joining the Yeomanry
O. Sir H. Vincent; A. Lord Stanley, June 24, 1197.
Returned Yeomen from South Africa, see title Yeomanry.
Zulu Cattle Raiding under British Military Authority, alleged
Qs. Mr. B. Roberts, Mr. Bryce; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 266, 267.
South-Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railways
Condition of Stations, Rolling Stock, etc. Debate on South-Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railways Bill, June 11, 23.
South-Eastern and London, Chatham and Dover Railways Bill
c. 2R., June 11, 21.
"South Esk," British Barque.
Provisions;Complaint of Crew, Inquiry
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 25, 1400.
South Essex Water Bill
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
South Kensington Museum
Buckland Fish Collection;Transference to Grimsby proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 909.
Loans of Pictures, etc.;Scotland
Debate in Com. of Supply. June 21, 1106.
South Kensington Science and Art Schools
Science and Art Directory Presented, June 11, 6; June 12, 148.
South Lancashire Tramways Bill
c., 2R.* June 12, 145.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill
c., 3R., June 11, 9.
l. 1R.* June 13, 214.
2R.* June 21, 1021.
South Western and Isle of Wight Junction Railway Bill
c., 2R.* June 14, 401.
Southampton Customs House
Passengers' Luggage, see that title.
Southampton and Winchester Great Western Junction Railway Bill
c. 3R.* June 13, 251.
l. 1R.* June 14, 379.
Southport Water (Transfer) Bill
c., 2R.* June 12, 145.
Sovereign's Oath on Accession Bill
Petitions, June 11, 50; June 13, 257; June 14, 404; June 18, 700; June 19, 815; June 20, 885; June 21, 1051; June 24, 1193.
Speaker;Rt. Hon. W, C. Gully [Carlisle]
Adjournments of the House;Motion for Adjournment of the House to discuss matter of urgent Public importance;Discussing Irrelevant Matter, June 17, 582, 591, 607.
Bills
Bills containing scientific matter, sending Bill to Grand Committee;Members raising Controversial Matters on Order for Committee [Beer Bill], June 26, 1539.
Discussions on Second Readings;Discussing Details such as Rates, etc., June 18, 690, 695.
Report Stage;New Clauses should be taken first on Report Stage, June 19, 859.
Reprinting Bills in accordance with Amendments, June 19, 849.
Titles of Provisional Order Bills;Insufficient Identification, June 14, 388.
Instructions to Committee out of Order;Finance Bill, June 18, 755.
Irrelevant Observations, June 11, 28, 30, 31, 32, 34, 35; June 12, 156; June 26, 1513, 1519, 1521, 1526, 1528.
"Orders of the Day";Government Orders put down first on Tuesday, June 11, 70.
Point of Order;Personal Explanation was not a Point of Order, June 25, 1405.
Questions
Reading Paragraph from Newspaper and asking Minister if it were correct, June 14, 431.
Supplementary Questions ruled out of order, June 24, 1212.
Sovereign, Bringing Opinions of the Sovereign into Debate, June 21, 1026.
Spen Valley Light Railway (Extensions)
Order Presented, June 14, 381, 405.
Spencer, Earl
Demise of the Crown Bill, 2R., June 17, 527.
Drunkards Bill, 3R., June 20, 875, 876.
Spirits
Illicit Distillation, see Distillation.
Stalybridge, Hyde, Mossley, and Duttonfield Tramways and Electricity Board Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 25, 1388.
Stamps
see Postage Stamps.
Standing Committees
see Committees.
Standing Orders
Auction Clause;South Metropolitan Gas Bill, Mr. Lough's Amendment, June 11, 10.
Lords';locus standi and Water Bills.
Os. Earl of Northbrook, Earl of Morley, June 21, 1022, 1023.
Leeds Corporation Water Bill debate, June 24, 1175.
Stanley, Lord;Financial Secretary to the War Office [Lancashire, West Houghton]
Bullets;Mark IV. Ammunition, June 25, 1394.
Clothing Department Overtime Pay;Writers' Rate of Pay, etc., June 25, 1394.
Contracts
Fair Wage Resolution, Compliance with, June 24, 1197.
Irish Firms
Barrack Stores;Purchasing at Woolwich, June 17, 548; June 18, 704.
Beer Contracts, Withdrawing from Irish Firms, June 17, 548.
Deceased Soldiers' Estates;Case of J. Curtin, June 17, 546.
King's Royal Rifles;Second Battalion returned to India from South Africa, Outfit Expenses, June 18, 703.
Meat, Poisonous Tinned Meat at Fermoy Barracks, June 14, 412; June 17, 547.
"Mongolian," Transport to South Africa;Registered Accommodation for Troops, etc., June 14, 412.
Penrhyn Quarry Dispute;Military Aid to the Civil Power, June 14, 413; June 17, 548.
Recruits
Ireland, Number Recruited in 1901, etc., June 14, 415.
Statistics;Monthly Return proposed, June 18, 706.
Rifle Clubs, Ireland;Supplying Clubs with Government, Rifles and Ammunition, June 14, 415.
Rifles, Manufacture of New Rifles, Space required for, etc., June 24, 1331.
Seaforth Militia;Return from Egypt, Insufficient Steamer Accommodation to Stornoway, June 21, 1057.
South African War
Beer Rations on Transports from South Africa, etc., June 18, 705.
Courts-Martial;Statistics of Imprisonment, June 11, 55.
Dublin Fusiliers;Prisoners rejoining regiment, Arrears of Pay, June 18, 704.
Horses, Number obtained in South Africa;Report, June 11, 54, 55.
Spion Kop, Survey of;Laying before Parliament, proposed, June 14, 411.
Volunteers
Bucks Volunteers returned home;Thirty days Furlough with Pay, June 17, 545.
Number joining Imperial Yeomanry, June 24, 1197.
Staff paymasters;Increase in Pay proposed, June 24, 1198.
Volunteers
Ireland;Volunteers drilling with Regulars in Dublin, etc., June 14, 414.
London;Providing Drill Sheds and Ranges, Borough Councils' Powers, June 17, 549.
Officers;Man&#x0153;uvres, Additional Allowance for Field Officers, June 17, 545.
Stanley of Alderley, Lord
Bengal Railways;Inadequate Engineering Works, June 13, 219.
Steam Engines and Boilers (Persons in Charge) Bill
Select Committee Nominated, June 11, 144.
Steamship Subsidies Committee
Vincent, Sir E., Added to the Committee, June 13, 331.
Stepney
Site for Board School;Petition, June 11, 50.
Stevenson, Mr. F. S. [Suffolk, Eye]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1523.
Civil List Bill, 3R., June 18, 746.
Constantinople Riots;British Merchants' Compensation Claims, June 13, 272.
Finance Bill, Com., June 24, 1256.
Stewart, Sir Mark [Kirkcudbright]
China;Indemnity, Taxing Rice and Opium to pay Indemnity, June 18, 710.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, Con., June 12, 173.
Stirling-Maxwell, Sir J. [Glasgow College]
National Gallery, Scotland;Increase in Grant, etc., June 21, 1107, 1110.
Queen's Hall Pro-Boer Meeting, Number of Police employed, etc., June 21, 1064.
Stock Farms in South Africa
see Africa, South
Stockport Corporation Water Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 18, 682; 3R.* June 24, 1174.
c., 1R.* June 25, 1389.
Stokers
see Navy
Stornoway Mail Service
Inviting Tenders for Mail Service proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 284.
Steamer "Clydesdale," etc.
Os. Mr. Weir, June 24, 1320; Mr. A. Chamberlain, 1323.
Strachey, Mr. E. [Somerset, S.]
Brighton Corporation Bill, Con, June 17, 531.
Milk Standard Fixing;Report of Departmental Committee, June 14, 422.
Out-door Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 850.
Pethertoh, South, Post Office;Removal to another part of Parish, June 13, 283.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill, 3R., June 17, 11.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Con, June 14, 385.
Stratford-upon-Avon, Towcester and Midland Junction, East and West Junction and Evesham, Redditch and Stratford-upon-Avon Junction Railway Companies Bill
c. Report,* June 18, 699.
Con* June 24, 1190.
Stratton and Bude Improvement Bill
l. Report,* June 18, 681.
3R.* June 21, 1023.
c., 1R. * June 24, 1192.
Streets
Breaking up London Streets, Inconvenience caused by;Number of Local Authorities having Power to take up Streets, etc.
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 13, 280.
Stroud Gas Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 3.
Report,* June 21, 1021.
Submarine Telegraph Company
Clerks transferred to Post Office;Counting Service towards Pension
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 14, 424.
Sugar Duty
Additional Duty;Budget Proposals
Finance Bill Debate, June 18, 785; June 20, 929; June 24, 1230.
Colonies, Preferential Treatment of, 929.
Condensed Milk, Duty on, 1259.
Date of Levying Duty;"As from "and" On and after," Similarity of terms, 785, 1295.
Glucose, Duty on, 1008, 1255.
Molasses, Duty on, 1003.
Polariscope, Use of, in Testing Sugar, 986, 1250.
Saccharine, Definition of, 1008.
"Sweetening Matter," Definition of, 1004.
Fruit Duty, see that title.
Glucose;Resolution Reported, June 11, 143.
Molasses for Cattle Feeding, Reduction of Duty;Refunding Extra Duty, proposed
Q. Mr. C. M'Arthur; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 17, 554.
Molasses;Resolution Reported, June 11, 143.
Superannuation
Civil Service, see that title.
Board of Education;Grant of Retired Allowance to Mr. A. C. G. Cameron;Treasury Minute Presented, June 26, 1511.
Supply
Civil Service and Revenue Department Estimates
Post Office Packet Service;;571,085, Rep., June 24, 1320.
Scotch Votes
Education, Science, and Art, etc.;;713,881, Con., June 21, 1082; Rep.,* June 24, 1319.
National Gallery;;2,000, Com., June 21, 1106; Rep.* June 24, 1319.
Prisons, Criminal Lunatic Asylums, Preparation of Judicial Statistics;;58,193, Com., June 21, 1119; Rep.* June 24, 1319.
Secretary for Scotland's Office, Salaries and Expenses;;7,954, Com., June 21, 1130.
Supplementary Estimate, 1901&#x2013;2, Presented, June 25, 1390.
Trade, Board of, Salaries and Expenses;;132,328, Com., June 13, 331.
Procedure
Consolidated Fund Bill, see that title.
Order of Taking Votes;Financial necessities of the Administration, etc.;Mr. Balfour's Replies to Questions, June 24, 1227, 1228, 1229.
Time taken up in discussing Matters of Secondary Importance
O. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 14, 507.
Supreme Court of Judicature (Appeals) Bill.
l. 2R. June 20, 880.
Com. June 24, 1185.
Report,* June 25, 1345.
Surveyors of Taxes
Clerks, Appointment of;Regulations
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 20, 906.
Surveys, Naval
Hydrographer's Report Presented, June 11, 51; June 13, 214.
Sutton-in-Ashfield Urban District (Water) Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 253
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1190.
Swanlinbar
Petty Sessions, Attendance of Resident Magistrate, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1075.
Swanage Gas and Water Bill
l. 2R.* June 14, 378.
Swansea Harbour Bill
c. Con.* June 19, 813.
Report,* June 13, 252.
3R.* June 24, 1190.
l. 1R.* June 24, 1180.
"Sybille," H.M.S.
Wreck of;Composition of Force Afloat and Ashore.
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 20, 895.
T
Taff Vale Railway Bill
l. Report,* June 21, 1021.
3R.* June 25, 1336.
Talbot, Rt. Hon. J. G. [Oxford University];
Factory and "Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 11, 141.
Tawin
Water Supply;Absence of Fresh Water
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 567.
Taxation
Local Taxation, see that title.
Taxation of Ireland, see Ireland;Budget Proposals, etc.
Taylor, Mr. T. C. [Lancashire, Radcliffe]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 670.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 793; June 20, 963.
South Metropolitan Gas Bill, 3R., June 11, 14.
Transport Service;Non-Intoxicating Liquors for Troops, June 18, 705.
Tea Duty
Colonies, Preferential Treatment of the Colonies
Debate on the Finance Bill, June 18, 765.
Consumption of Tea, ad valorem Duty proposed, etc.
Debate on Finance Bill, June 18, 755.
Teachers
see Education.
Telegraph Service
Efficiency Barrier;Technical Examination
Q. Mr. Wallace; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1217.
Meal Reliefs;London Telegraph Clerks Q. Mr. Hay; A. Mr. W. H. Fisher, June 81, 1069.
Railway Companies;Value of Services rendered by Post Office during 1900 and 1901
Q. Mr. Lonsdale; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 281.
Submarine Telegraph Company's Ex-clerks;Counting Service towards Pension
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 14, 424.
Underground Wires;London to Birmingham, Results of Experiments, etc.
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 13, 283.
Telephone Service
Flint, Telephonic Communication with;Delay in Establishing
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 24, 1215.
Northampton and London, Service between;Delays
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. Chamberlain, June 13, 282.
Treasury Grant in 1899, Amount Expended;London Exchange System, etc.
Q. Sir J. Woodhouse; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 18, 717.
Templemore
Water Supply, Insufficiency of;Delay in Effecting Improvements, etc.
Q. Mr. K. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1073.
Tennant, Mr. H. J. [Berwickshire]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 11, 122.
Tendring Hundred Water Bill
l. Report,* June 21, 1021.
Terrington, St. Clement Parish
Rate Collector collecting for Denominational Schools;Placing sums upon Rate Tickets, etc.
Q. Mr. G. White; A. Mr. Long, June 11, 60.
Thames Deep Water Dock Bill
l. Report,* June 14, 377.
3R.* June 18, 682.
Thibet
Russia, Mission to, to solicit protection against British encroachment, alleged
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 21, 1060.
Thomas, Mr. Abel [Carmarthen, E.]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1446, 1461.
Thomas, Mr. D. A. [Merthyr Tydvil]
Coal
Cardiff Exports;Discrepancy in Figures, etc., June 14, 422; June 25, 1402.
Inquiry into Coal Question;Effect of Export Duty on Trade and Shipping, Remission of Duty, etc., June 20, 902; June 24, 1206; June 25, 1398.
Small Coal;Proposed Reduction of Duty, June 18, 713.
Trade Statistics;Return, June 25, 1402.
Collieries in South Wales
Fatal Accidents;Disparity in Death Rate, June 17, 557.
Mortality among Young People, Increase of, June 17, 557.
Finance Bill;Coal Duty, etc., Com., June 18, 785; June 24, 1267, 1287, 1294, 1295; June 25, 1447, 1448, 1450, 1460, 1485, 1496, 1499.
Iron Ore;Amount Imported into South Wales in 1900, etc., June 13, 278.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 181.
Patagonia, Welsh Settlement;Report of Chaplain of H.M.S. "Flora," etc. June 13, 273.
Penrhyn Quarry Dispute;Military Aio to the Civil Power, June 14, 413.
Railway Accidents, Prevention of;Notification of Rules, etc., June 17, 559, 560.
Thomas, Mr. J. A. [Glamorgan, Gower]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1456.
Thompson, Dr. E. C. [Monaghan, N.]
Imperial Yeomanry;Allocation of New Regiments to Ireland, suggestion, June 25, 1393.
Thorburn, Sir W. [Peebles and Selkirk.]
Arizona Copper Company, Ltd., Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons, proposed, June 13, 248.
Tied Houses Abolition Bill
Petitions, June 13, 257.
Timber
Norway and Sweden;Export Duty on Timber in Retaliation for British Coal Export Duty
O. Sir J. Joicey, June 24, 1315.
Tinned Meat
Army Rations, see Army;Meat.
Tomlinson, Mr. W. E. M. [Preston]
Cremation Bill, Con. June 19, 861, 862, 864.
St. George, Botolph Lane, Parish of;Payment of Curate by Charity Commissioners, etc., June 21, 1066.
Tonnage Dues
Merchant Shipping;Regulations for Registration of Coasting and Cross Channel Steamers
Qs. Mr. Field; As. Mr. G. Balfour, June 17, 558; June 20, 904; June 25, 1402.
Torrington and Okehampton Railway Bill
l. 2R.* June 18, 682.
Tottenham and Hampstead Junction Railway Bill
l. 2R* June 14, 378.
Trade, Board of
President; Rt. Hon. G. W. Balfour.
Parliamentary Secretary;Earl of Dudley.
Nautical Staff;Return Ordered (Lord Muskerry), June 18, 686.
President's Salary;"Miserable Pittance"
O. Mr. W. Allan, June 13, 339.
Salaries and Expenses, Vote for, June 13, 331.
Trade Reports Presented
Annual Series, June 11, 6, 51; June 13, 214, 258; June 17, 511, 539; June 18, 685, 700; June 20, 874, 386; June 24, 1184, 1194.
Miscellaneous Series, June 20, 873, 886.
Tramway Horses
Purchase of, by Military Authorities, see Horses, Army.
Tramways
Electric Trams in Scotland;Number of Accidents in Edinburgh and Glasgow in 1901, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, June 14, 425.
Tramways (Consent of Local Authorities) Bill
Petition against Amendment of Standing) Order No. 22, June 11, 7; June 13, 216.
Tramways Orders Confirmation (No. 1 Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 5.
Tramways Orders Confirmation (No. 2) Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 20, 870.
Com.* June 24, 1181.
Report* June 25, 1343.
Tramways Orders Confirmation (No. 3) Bill
l. 2R.*, June 11, 5.
Tramways Orders Confirmation (No. 4) Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 5.
Transport Service
South African War
Beer Rations on Transports from South Africa, etc.
Qs. Mr. Llewellyn, Mr. Taylor; As. Lord Stanley, June 18, 705.
Efficiency of Transport Service
O. Lord Muskerry, June 17, 514.
"Mongolian";Registered Accommodation for Troops, Illness on Board, etc.
Qs. Sir W. Foster, Mr. Seely; As. Lord Stanley, Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 14, 411.
Transubstantiation
King's Declaration against, see Roman Catholicism.
Transvaal
Concessions Committee Report;Inquiry into Mining Concessions proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 14, 410.
Constitution of Legislative Councils of the Transvaal and Orange River Colony, Opportunity for discussing
Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 11, 56.
Financial Position
Barbour's, Sir D., Report
Q. Mr. M'Dermott; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 11, 55.
Approval of H.M. Government, etc.
Qs. Mr. Dalziel, Mr. Lough, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 17, 539.
Taxation of Gold Mines;Special war tax proposed.
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. Chamberlain, June 24, 1195.
Natives;Use of Lash, High Commissioner's Sanction, Control of Native Labour, etc.
Q. Mr. T. Bayley; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, June 18, 702.
South African War, see that title.
Stock Farms, Establishment of, by British Government
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 52.
Trawling
Irish Waters
Dingle Bay;Prosecutions, Proposed Alteration of Law
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 568.
Prosecutions;Return Ordered, June 20, 887.
Prosecutions since 1890;Return
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 922.
Treasury
First Lord;Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour.
Financial Secretary;Mr. A. Chamberlain.
Trevelyan, Mr. C. P. [York, W. R. Elland]
British Literature, Canadian Tariffs on;Proposed Reduction of Rate, June 18, 715.
Trew, Mr.
Speeches at Belfast, see Belfast;Riots.
Trinity College, Dublin
Opposition to teaching of the Irish Language References to, in Debate on the Intermediate Education Rules, June 21, 1154, 1161.
Tripoli
Trade Report Presented June 24, 1184.
Tritton, Mr. O. E. [Lambeth, Norwood]
Business of the House;Facilities for Passing Children's Bill, June 11, 94.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1513, 1514, 1515.
Trout Fishing Annual Close Time (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, June 11, 50; June 12, 148; June 13, 257; June 25, 1389.
Trustee Savings Banks
Return Ordered, June 17, 679; Return Presented, June 21, 1051.
Tuberculosis
Aliens suffering from, Excluding from Admission to the United States;Similar Regulation for Great Britain
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Long, June 25, 1406.
Tullamore
Quarter Sessions
Judge discharging Jury;Fine, etc.
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 13, 291.
Peterson, Crown v.;Order made by Judge, Laying copy on the Table
Q. Mr. Delany; A. Mr. Atkinson, June 17, 569.
Turkey
Anatolian Railway;Papers
Q. Lord E. Fitzmaurice; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 24, 1203.
Constantinople Riots of 1896;British Merchants' Claims, Delay in Payment, etc.
Q. Mr. Stevenson; A. Visc. Cranborne, June 13, 272.
Konia;Abolition of British Vice-Consulate
Q. Earl Percy; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 18, 711
Railway Concessions to German Syndicate, Turco-Russian Agreement, etc.
Qs. Lord E. Fitzmaurice, Earl Percy; As. Vis. Cranborne, June 18, 708.
Tariff Charges in Asia Minor, Proposed Increase in
Q. Mr. J. O'Kelly; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 24, 1203.
Trade Report Presented, June 24, 1184.
Tweedmouth, Lord
Glasgow Corporation (Police) Provisional Order Confirmation Bill, 2R., June 25, 1340.
Tyneside Tramways and Tramroads Bil
c. 2R.* June 12, 145.
Typhoid Fever
South African War, see that title.
U
Ulster
Railways and Fruit Carriage;Complaints against Great Northern Railway Company
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 18, 724.
Ulster Custom (No. 2) Bill
c. 2R. June 12, 149.
Underground Telegraph Wires
see Telegraph Wires.
United Irish League
see Ireland.
United States
Alien Immigration Restrictions
Admission, Number refused
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 24, 1209.
Aliens suffering from Contagious Diseases, Regulations;Similar Regulations for Great Britain.
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Long, June 25, 1406.
Diplomatic and Consular Services;Annual Cost of Service
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 20, 899.
Mail Service, see that title;American Mails.
University Education, Ireland
see Ireland.
V
Vaccination Prosecutions Bill
c., 1R.* June 17, 680.
Venezuela
Trade Reports Presented, June 24, 1184.
"Victoria and Albert"
New Royal Yacht
Designer of, Designing and Superintending Building of other Vessels.
Expenditure on, Failure of Design, etc.;Committee of Inquiry, proposed
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 14, 478.
Q. Mr. Hoult; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 25, 1394.
Vincent, Sir Howard [Sheffield, Central]
Alien Immigration
London Census Returns, June 13, 280.
Statistics of Immigrants into United Kingdom in 1900, June 24, 1208.
United States Restrictions
Contagious Diseases Restrictions Similar Regulation for Great Britain, June 25, 1406.
Number Refused Admission at American Ports, Number Arriving at British Port, June 24, 1209.
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 756, 765; June 20, 936, 949, 957, 959; June 24, 1237.
London Streets, Breaking up;Inconvenience caused by, etc., June 13, 280.
London Volunteers;Providing Drill Sheds and Ranges, Borough Councils' Powers, June 17, 549.
South African War;Number of Volunteers Joining the Imperial Yeomanry, June 24, 1197.
Vlakfontein
see South African War.
Voluntary Schools
Rate Aid for;Round Table Conference in London
Q. Mr. G. White; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 13, 279.
Rate Collectors Collecting for;Placing Sums upon Rate Tickets, etc.
Q. Mr. G. White; A. Mr. Long, June 11, 60.
Volunteers
Ammunition
Kynoch's, Messrs., Offer
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 21, 1057.
Supplying Volunteers with gratuitous Ammunition for Private Practice, etc.
Q. Col. Sadler; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 13, 268.
Conditions of Service, Training, etc.;Government Reorganisation Scheme
Debate (Lords), June 25, 1363.
Ireland;Drilling with Regulars in Dublin;Expenses, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Lord Stanley, June 14, 414.
London;Providing Drill Sheds and Ranges, Borough Councils' Powers
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 549.
Officers' Man&#x0153;uvres;Additional Allowance for Field Officers
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 544.
Returned Volunteers from South Africa;Gratuity and Discharge Regulations
Bucks Volunteers
Q. Mr. Carlile; A. Lord Stanley, June 17, 545.
London Scottish Volunteers
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 14, 411.
South African War, see that title.
Welsh Fusiliers, Royal;Want of Arm and Equipment
Qs. Mr. O. Williams, Mr. H. Lewis; As. Mr. Brodrick June 20, 894.
W
Wales
Coal, Export Duty, etc., see title Coal.
Colleries in South Wales
Fatal Accidents;Disparity in Death Rate, etc.
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 17, 557.
Mortality among young people, Increase of
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 17, 557.
Education, see that title;Wales.
Flint, see that title.
Iron Ore, Amount imported into South Wales in 1900;alleged Notification from Spanish Government, etc.
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. G. Balfour, June 13, 278.
Mail Service;Llannwchllyn, Conveyance of Mails from Bala by Train, proposed
Q. Mr. O. Williams; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, June 11, 63.
Mines, Inspectors of;Appointment of Welsh Speaking Inspector, Dr. Foster's Successor, etc.
Q. Mr. O. Williams; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 11, 59.
Qs. Mr. Moss, Mr. S. Evans; As. Mr. Ritchie, June 13, 274.
Q. Mr. Moss; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 14, 420.
Penrhyn Quarry Dispute, see that title.
Wallace, Mr. R. [Perth]
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1533.
Telegraph Service;Efficiency Barrier, Technical Examination, June 24, 1217.
Wallasey Improvement Bill
c. Con., June 14, 384.
3R.* June 18, 696.
l. 1R.* June 20, 871.
Walrond, Rt. Hon. Sir W. H.;Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury [Devon, Tiverton]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Com., June 26, 1516.
Walsall
School, Exemptions from Attendance;Powers of School Board, etc.
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Sir J. Gorst, June 20, 908.
Watch Committee and Licensing Prosecutions;Constable consulting Town Clerk before taking out Summonses
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 18, 714.
Walsh, Mr. P. T.
Appointment as J. P., Association with the United Irish League, etc.
Qs. Mr. W. Johnston, Mr. P. J. Power; As. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1075.
Walton, Mr. Joseph [York, W. R., Barnsley]
China;Shanghai, German Garrison, Retention of, etc., June 13, 270.
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1477.
Walton, Mr. J. Lawson [Leeds, S.]
Christ's Hospital (London) Bill;Instruction to Committee, June 21, 1038.
Wapping Street Disturbance
Absence of Police, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. Ritchie, June 17, 556.
War Office
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. St. John Brodrick.
Under Secretary;Lord Raglan.
Financial Secretary;Lord Stanley.
Decentralisation Committee of 1898;Recommendations
Q. Mr. C. Hobhouse; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 17, 545.
Organisation;Report of Committee, Delay in Publication
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 53.
Vote;Date of taking, Opportunity for Discussion, etc.
Q. Captain Norton; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 13, 299.
Warner, Mr. T. Courtenay [Stafford, Lichfield]
Outdoor Relief (Friendly Societies) Bill, 2R., June 19, 858.
South African War;Horses, Supply of Remounts, etc., June 25, 1431.
Warr, Mr. [Liverpool, East Toxteth]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1495.
Warwick, County of
Polling Districts;Order Presented, June 13, 215.
Wason, Mr. C. [Orkney and Shetland]
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 952.
Highlands and Islands;Medical Officers of Health, Appointment of, without Public Health Diplomas, June 14, 425.
Wason, Mr. E. [Clackmannan and Kinross]
Arizona Copper Company, Limited, Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons proposed, June 13, 241.
Cape Colony;Financial Provision for Public Service, Prorogation of Parliament, etc., June 25, 1391.
Water Bills
Locus standi
Os. Earl of Northbrook, Earl of Morley, June 21, 1022, 1023.
Leeds Corporation Water Bill Debate, June 24, 1175.
Water Orders Confirmation (No. 1) Bill
l. Report from Select Committee, June 20, 870.
Com.* June 24, 1181.
Report*, June 25, 1343.
Memorandum Presented, June 26, 1511.
Water Orders Confirmation (No. 2) Bill
l. 2R. June 11, 5.
Com.* June 24, 1182.
Report,* June 25, 1343.
Memorandum Presented, June 26, 1511.
Water Supply
Ireland
Tawin Water Supply;Absence of Fresh Water
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 17, 567.
Templemore, Unsatisfactory Water Supply, Delay in effecting New Scheme
Q. Mr. K. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1073.
Water-tube Boilers
see Navy;Boilers.
Ways and Means
Consolidated Fund (No. 2) Bill;Resolution in Committee, June 25, 1423; Resolution Reported, June 26, 1545.
Procedure;Resolutions in Committee
Discussion must be confined to the subject actually involved
Debate, June 25, 1424.
Mystery and Secrecy of Proceedings
Os. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, June 25, 1428.
Statement showing Grants in Committee of Supply upon which the Resolution of June 25 was based;Copy Presented, June 26, 1511.
Weather Forecasts
see Meteorological Reports.
Weights and Measures
Brewers;Goods sent out to Customers, Inspection of, proposed
Os. Mr. Broadhurst, June 13, 337.
Weir, Mr. J. G. [Ross and Cromarty]
Applecross Fishery;Erection of Pier at Annat proposed, June 14, 425.
Avoch Harbour, Repairs of, June 13, 284.
Buckland Fish Collection;Transference to Grimsby, Proposed, June 20, 909.
Bullets;Number of Expanding Bullets manufactured for War Office, Withdrawal, etc., June 25, 1394.
Congested Districts Board
Administrative Defects, etc., June 21, 1130.
Ross and Cromarty, Settling people on the Land;Non-acquisition of Land, etc., June 20, 911.
Edinburgh Sasine Offioe;Registration Fees, June 25, 1412.
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R., June 19, 834.
Glasgow Electric Tram Accidents in 1901, etc., June 14, 425.
Highlands and Islands of Scotland;Needs of the Cottars and Crofters, etc., June 21, 1131.
Judicial Statistics;Returns from Sasine Office, Alleged Omission, June 18, 720.
Killilan Deer Forest, Extension of, June 13, 286.
Letters;House to House Delivery authorised by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his Budget Speech of 1897;Number of Letters delivered, etc., June 21, 1068; June 25, 1409.
Mallaig Mails, Conveyance of, etc., June 21, 1067.
Maraig Burial Ground;Overcrowding, etc., June 11, 64.
Medical Officers of Health, Appointments of, etc.
Districts other than Burghs, June 20, 910.
Number;Number holding Public Health Diploma, June 11, 64; June 13, 287.
National Gallery, Scotland;Increase in Grant proposed, June 21, 1110.
Post Office Savings Bank
Deposits by Cheques, Rule as to Acknowledgment, June 25, 1408.
Withdrawals by Telegraph in 1900, etc., June 18, 717.
Post Office Savings Bank and Postal Order Business in Rural Post Offices, June 21, 1067.
Richmond Park Oaks;Planting Oak Saplings, June 18, 720.
Rifles, Manufacture of, at Enfield, Chaplain's Salary, etc., June 24, 1331.
Seaforth Militia;Return from Egypt, Insufficient Steamer Accommodation to Stornoway, June 21, 1057.
Shader Cove;Petition for Removal of Overhanging Rock, June 13, 285.
Sheriff's Salaries, Scotland;Proposed increase, June 20, 905.
South African War
Beyer's, Gen., Commando, Surprise;Telegram of Inquiry stopped by Censor, etc., June 18, 701.
Volunteers;London Scottish Volunteers, Conditions of Enlistment, Furlough and Pay, June 14, 411.
Stornoway Mail Service
Inviting Tenders for Mail Service proposed, June 13, 284.
Steamer "Clydesdale," etc., June 24, 1320.
Transvaal Concessions Committee Report;Inquiry into Mining Concessions proposed, June 14, 410.
Welsh Fusiliers, Royal
Arms and Equipment, Want of
Qs. Mr. O. Williams, Mr. H. Lewis; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 894.
West Cumberland Electric Tramways Bill
c., 1R.* June 11, 6.
3R.* June 11, 47.
West Indies
Sugar Duty, Budget Proposals;Preferential Treatment, State of Sugar Trade, etc.
Finance Bill Debate, June 18, 765; June 20, 929; June 24, 1251.
West Surrey Water Bill
l. 2R.* June 11, 3.
Report,* June 21, 1021.
Westport
Land Sales;Purchases by Congested Districts Board
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1222.
Police Arrangements;Removal of Huts, etc.
Qs. Dr. Ambrose, Mr. J. O'Donnell; Qs., Mr. Wyndham, June 24, 1222.
Wexford
County and District Surveyors, Increased Salaries;Report of Inquiry, etc.
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 21, 1077.
Whale Island
Bandsmen;Armv Pensioners' Allowance
Q. Mr. R. Lucas; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, June 21, 1059.
White, Mr. G. [Norfolk, N.W.]
Rate Collectors collecting for Denominational Schools;Placing Sums upon Rate Ticket, June 11, 60.
School Libraries, Expenditure on;Legality of Expenditure, June 25, 1406.
Voluntary Schools, Rate Aid for;Round Table Conference in London, June 13, 279.
White, Mr. P. [Meath, N.]
Navan Mail Service;Delays, June 13, 296.
White, Sir W.
Royal Yacht;Miscalculations in Respect of Stability, etc.
References to, in Debate in Com. of Supply, June 14, 479, 482, 491, 497, 499, 500, 502.
Whiteley, Mr. H. [Ashton-under-Lyne]
Finance Bill, Com., June 25, 1471.
Whitmore, Mr. C. A. [Chelsea]
Government Offices, Death of Architects Carrying out Designs of Mr. Young and Mr. Brydon, June 14, 426.
Royal Palaces;Structural Alterations and Drainage Works, Supplementary Estimate, June 18, 721.
Wigan Corporation Tramways, etc., Bill
c., 2R.* June 14, 401.
Williams, Mr. Osmond [Merionethshire]
Llannwychllyn Mail Service;Conveyance of Mails by Train from Bala, proposed, June 11, 63.
Mines, Inspectors of;Appointment of Welsh-speaking Inspector in Wales, etc., June 11, 59.
Volunteers, Royal Welsh Fusiliers;Want of Arms and Equipment, June 20, 894
Wilson, Mr. C. H. [Hull, W.]
Finance Bill, Com., June 20, 948.
Wilson, Mr. H. J. [York, W.R., Holmflrth]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 675.
Wilson, Mr. J. [Durham, Mid.]
Finance Bill, Com. June 24, 1272, 1290; June 25, 1437, 1448, 1457, 1490, 1491, 1492, 1497, 1498.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 179.
Wilson, Mr. J. [Falkirk Burghs]
Finance Bill, Com., June 18, 793.
Lanark, Sheriff-Substitute, Appointment;Procurator-Fiscal, Appointment at Linlithgow, June 21, 1134, 1136.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 188.
Wilson, Mr. J. W. [Worcestershire, N.]
Factory and Workshop Acts Amendment Bill, 2R., June 17, 672.
Windsor Castle
Structural Alterations and Drainage Works;Supplementary Estimate
Q. Mr. Whitmore; A. Mr. Douglas, June 18, 721.
Wine
Fortifying Wine in Bond;Rule as to Quality and Age of Spirits, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Sir M. H. Beach, June 20, 903.
Royal Cellars;Sale of Wine from, Payment of Duty.
Qs. Mr. M'Dermott, Mr. P. O'Brien; As. Sir M. H. Beach, June 21, 1060.
Winsford Urban District (Gas Transfer, etc.) Bill
c. Report,* June 13, 252.
Con.* June 19, 813.
3R.* June 24, 1190.
l. 1R.* June 24, 1180.
Wisbech Water Bill
l. 3R.* June 11, 4.
c., 1R* June 13, 255.
2R.* June 24, 1191.
Wolseley, Lord
Army Reform;Mr. Cardwell's Scheme, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 17, 546.
Woodhouse, Sir J. T. [Huddersfield]
Telephone Service;Treasifry Grant of 1899, Amount Expended, London Exchange System, etc., June 18, 717.
Worcester Tramways Bill
l. Report,* June 14, 377.
3R.* June 20, 871.
c., 1R.* June 21, 1050.
Workhouses
Ireland
Amalgamation of Unions;Appointment of Sanitary Officer for Group of Unions, etc.
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 20, 913.
Cost of Pauper Maintenance, Difference in Cost in Various Unions.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1416.
Nurses;Trained Nurses, Recoupment of Salary out of Local Taxation Account
Q. Mr. M Govern; A. Mr. Wyndham, June 25, 1417.
Workmen's Compensation Act
Amendment Proposed;Irish Traders' Congress Resolution
Q. Mr. Nannetti; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, June 24, 1226.
Appeals;Exclusion of Appeals from the House of Lords
Os. Lord Heneage, Lord Halsbury, June 24, 1185, 1186.
Workmen's Compensation Act (1897) Amendment (No. 2) Bill
Petition, June 11, 51.
Workmen's Hours Tenure Bill
Petition, June 13, 257.
Workmen's Trains
Inadequate Facilities;Fares, Accommodation, Time of Running Trains, Facilities for Women and Girls, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 13, 331.
Wortley Rt. Hon. C. Stuart [Sheffield, Hallam]
Arizona Copper Company Limited Order Confirmation Bill;Joint Committee of Lords and Commons, proposed, June 13, 249.
Beer Bill, Com., June 26, 1522.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 185.
Wrecks
Communications between Board of Trade and Admiralty, Wreck Inquiries;Coastguard Service on the Coast of Devon, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, June 13, 344.
Wrench v. Langworthy Bros.
Qs. Maj. Rasch, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. Brodrick, June 20, 895.
Wrightson, Sir T. [St. Pancras, E.]
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 204.
Wylie, Mr. A. [Dumbartonshire]
Education (Young Children School Attendance) (Scotland) Bill, 3R., June 19, 831.
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. G;Chief Secretary for Ireland [Dover]
Ballyvaughan Fishing Industry;Assisting Fishermen, etc., June 17, 564.
Bawnboy Rural District, Congestion in;Scheduling Congested Districts, June 20, 918.
Belfast
Revaluation Appeals;Assimilating Irish System to that of England proposed, June 18, 721.
Riots
Attack on Roman Catholic Procession, etc., June 14, 431, 432, 433, 449.
Shipbuilding Yards;Police patrolling Yards, June 18, 732, 733, 734.
Trew's, Mr., Speeches Inciting, June 21, 1076.
Bradshaw, Rev. Nevin, Assault on, June 21, 1078.
Butter, Prices in, Statistics for 1900;Prices of Creamery Butter, etc., June 13, 289.
Cavan, Old Prison, Transfer to Military Authorities, June 25, 1419.
Census Returns;Date of Issue, etc., June 14, 429.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
Belfast Constabulary Equipment, June 24, 1223.
Grievances;Report of Inquiry, June 14, 428.
Killarney, Visitors to;Action of Police at Queenstown, June 11, 66.
Mayo County, Police Force;Number of Police, 1895&#x2013;1900, etc., June 20, 912.
Retirements on Pensions during last 12 months, June 14, 426.
Return, June 24, 1221.
Sheridan, Sergeant, and Constable Mahony, Discharge of, June 13, 294, 295.
Starkey, Sergeant, Case of, June 21, 1074.
Westport Police Arrangements;Removal of huts at Slinnan and Moyna, etc., June 24, 1222.
Cork
Gas Workers' Strike;Sergeant Williams' Interference, alleged, June 21, 1076.
Poor Rate Collectors;Method of making Lodgments, Allocation of Interest, etc., June 20, 916.
Dairy Industry, Protection of;Foreign Products sold in England as Irish Products, etc., June 20, 917.
Drainage Works, Arterial Drainage;Government Assistance proposed, June 13, 296.
Dromore;Insanitary Condition of Tenement Houses, June 25, 1417.
Dublin
Four Courts;Taxing Masters' Salaries, etc., June 17, 571.
Metropolitan Police;Sending to Hythe for Musketry Drill, etc., June 11, 68.
Education
Hours of Attendance at School, Regulations, June 24, 1223.
Intermediate Education
Board of Intermediate Education, Constitution of, June 25, 1416.
New Rules, etc.
Attaching Marks to Honour Subjects, June 17, 565.
Percentage of Junior Grade Students passing Senior Grade, June 21, 1072.
Preparatory Grade Prizes, Discontinuance of, June 20, 916.
Teaching Irish Language, etc., June 21, 1163.
Emigration;Increase in Number of Emigrants alleged;Legislation proposed June 13, 297.
Evictions;Number of Families evicted 1886&#x2013;1900, etc., June 20, 913.
Fermanagh Royal School Endowments;Selection of Students, etc., June 13, 289.
Fisheries
Inspectors;Appointment of Mr. Lane, June 17, 566; June 18, 725, 726;. June 20, 919.
Inspectors' Report for 1900;Date of Publication, June 17, 565.
Mackerel Industry;Opening fresh Markets abroad, etc., June 20, 912.
Dingle Bay;Prosecutions, Proposed alteration of Law, June 17, 568.
Trawling
Dingle Bay;Prosecutions, Proposed Alteration of Law, June 17, 568.
Prosecutions since 1890;Return, June 20, 922.
Government Contractors and Fair Wages Resolution;Messrs. Blackie &amp; Co., June 13, 293.
Kenmare River Lights;Erection of Light on Sherky Island, proposed, June 13, 288.
Killaglin Railway;Baronial guarantee, Increase in, June 24, 1222.
Killcloony Property;Sale of Grass Farms to Tenants proposed, June 13, 290.
Labourers' Cottages, Ahinah;Rejection of J. Desmond's application, June 14, 427.
Land Commission
Cork Co.;J. Cronin's Farms, Insufficiency of Purchase Money to redeem superior interest, etc., June 13, 298.
Report;Date of Presenting to the House, June 25, 1419.
Land Judge's Court;Delays, etc.
Jones', J. E., Estate, June 13, 296.
Ogilby Estate, June 13, 290.
Land Purchase;Number of Tenant Purchasers under various Acts, June 25, 1414.
Landlord and Tenant;Tenant's difficulty in disposing of interest in Holding, June 24, 1224.
Limerick
County Council Meetings;Substitution of Half-Yearly for Quarterly Meetings, June 21, 1078.
Disturbances;case of Dr. Long, June 18, 722, 724.
Lisburn Disturbances;Mr. Trews' Speeches, Prosecution proposed, June 20, 915.
Local Government Provisional Order Bill;Putting in Force from Sept 30, proposed, June 17, 570.
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace Hickson, Mr.;Appointment as Resident Magistrate, June 18, 725.
Swanlinbar Petty Sessions, Attendance of.Resident Magistrate, &amp;c. June 21, 1076.
Walsh's, Mr. P. J., Appointment, &amp;c. June 21, 1075.
Mallaranny;Prosecutions for Cattle Trespassing, &amp;c. June 17, 567.
Marlborough Street Training College;Appointment of Principal, June 21, 1073.
National Library;American Patent Specifications, Offer of;Completing East Wing, etc., June 13, 287.
National School Teachers;Irish Language, Payment for Teaching
Bracklinn Teacher, June 13, 293.
Glengariff Teacher, June 17, 569.
Passengers' Luggage, Examination of, at Southampton, etc., June 20, 904.
Pauper Children;Classifying Children under two years of age as sick, etc., June 13, 294
Police Protection in Sligo, Case of Mr. Phibbs, June 25, 1414, 1415.
Potato Spraying;Names, Qualifications, etc., of Instructors, June 17, 565.
Public Works, carrying out;Increasing Powers of County Councils, proposed, June 14, 428.
Railways
Clare;South and West Clare Railways;Taxing Electoral Divisions of Dromane, etc., June 20, 918.
Killaglin Line;Baronial Guarantee, increase in, June 24, 1222.
Railways and Fruit Carriage;Complaints, June 18, 725.
Re-afforesting
Agricultural Department, Action of;Proposed Treasury Grant, etc., June 17, 569.
County Council's Powers, etc., June 21, 1072.
Forestry Department, Proposed Formation of, June 14, 427.
Reformatories and Industrial Schools
Circular of Oct., 1898, etc., June 18 727.
Committals;Legislation, proposed June 18, 726.
Dublin, Establishment of Industrial School,' June 13, 288.
Roads;Employment of Direct Labour, Provisional Order, June 14, 429; June 20, 921, 922.
Sligo, Co.
Boycotting;Case of Mr. Phibbs, June 20, 920.
Magistracy;Area of Adjudication, etc., June 20, 914.
Tawin Water Supply, June 17, 567.
Templemore Water Supply, Delay in Effecting Improvements in, June 21, 1074.
Tullamore Quarter Sessions;Judge discharging Jury, alleged Fine, etc., June 13, 291.
United Irish League and the Police
Camp, Co. Kerry;Action of Police, June 13, 292.
Dungourney and Mogeely Meetings, June 11, 67.
Shanballymore;Police tearing down Notice of Meeting, alleged, June 20, 915.
Wexford County and District Surveyors;Increased Salaries, etc., June 21, 1077.
Workhouses
Amalgamation of Unions, etc., June 20, 913.
Cost of Pauper Maintenance;Difference of Cost in Various Unions, June 25, 1416.
Trained Hospital Nurse at Bawnboy Union, Salary, etc., June 25, 1418.
Y
Yarborough, Countess of
Darcy de Knayth, Meynill and Fauconberg, Baronies of;Petition considered by Committee for Privileges, June 25, 1333.
Yeomanry, Imperial
Ireland;Allocation of a certain number of new Regiments to, Suggestion
Q. Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 25, 1393.
Reorganisation Proposals of the Government
Debate (Lords), June 25, 1369.
Returned Yeomen from South Africa;Inducing Men to join Yeomanry Regiments at Home.
Q. Mr. Renwick; Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 54.
Small Arms Ammunition, Reserve of;Calling in after outbreak of War, etc.
Q. Mr. Norman; A. Mr. Brodrick, June 11, 53.
South African War, see that title.
Yerburgh, Mr. R. A. [Chester]
China;Tariff, Concession of effective 5 per cent. Tariff', Guaranteee for fulfilment of Treaty Obligations, June 25, 1400.
Indian Army;Number of Time-expired Men awaiting Reliefs, June 25, 1393.
York and Lancaster Regiment
Men poisoned by eating Tinned Meat, see Army;Meat.
York, Archbishop of
Convocations of the Clergy Bill, 2R., June 13, 218.
Yorkshire Electric Power Bill
c. Report,* June 11, 48
Con* June 17, 536.
3R.* June 20, 883.
l. 1R.* June 20, 871.
Youthful Offenders Bill
c. Intro, and 1R., June 20, 927
2R.* June 24, 1332.
Youthful Offenders (Expenses)
Motion (Mr. Ritchie), June 26, 1584.
Yoxall, Mr. J. H. [Nottingham, W.]
Higher Elementary Schools;Cockerton judgment, Surcharges by Auditors, June 20, 909.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill, Com., June 12, 182, 188.
Postmen, Extra Pay;Queen Victoria's Funeral, June 24, 1218.
Z
Zanzibar
Slavery
Compensation for Slaves freed, Abolition of System
Q. Mr. J. A. Pease; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 24, 1204.
Mathews', Sir L. Suggestion as to Native Labour, Deportation of Slaves from Pemba, etc.
Q. Mr. T. Bayley; A. Vis. Cranborne, June 18, 707.
Zollverein Imperial
Establishment of
O. Mr. Holland, June 20, 953, 954.
Zouche of Haryngworth, Lord
Took the Oath, June 18, 681.
Zululand
Cattle Raiding, see South African War.