<page>579</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=619</url>
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Tuesday, 22nd October, 1901. First Readings - William Crothers Fitzgerald - Egmont National Park Bill. The Hon. the SPEAKER took the chair at half- past two o'clock. PRAYERS. FIRST READINGS. Fisheries Encouragement Bill, Inspection of Machinery Bill. WILLIAM CROTHERS FITZGERALD. On the motion of the Hon. Mr. JENKINSON, it was resolved, That the petition of William Crothers Fitzgerald, of Wellington, Public Vaccinator, praying that the balance of costs and expenses incurred by him in defending a certain suit be paid to him by the Government, be referred to the Government for considera- tion. EGMONT NATIONAL PARK BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER, in moving" the second reading of this Bill, said it had been rendered necessary because of the local difficulty which surrounded New Plymouth and the neighbourhood. Honourable members knew that in certain localities in the North Island road-metal was difficult to get, and it was found that the Act of last year setting apart this National Park prevented the supply of what was necessary for the construction of roads and maintenance of them. It would be seen that this Bill only endeavoured to give powers which might very safely be given to the Board. First, it allowed the cutting and re- moving of bare timber only ; secondly, it gave power to win or remove stone or gravel for making roads ; and, thirdly, it gave the Board power to construct tramways for the removal of such timber or road materials. Then, the Board may make by-laws under the principal Act describing the conditions under which the 
<page>580</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=620</url>
cessions to the Board were perfectly reason- able, and would not in any way be found to militate against the object of the principal Act in dealing with this reserve. The Hon. Mr. JENNINGS said he would have liked to have seen some special provision in this Bill to prevent that form of vandalism which had taken place in various parts of the colony, and which had caused the disfigurement of mountains, owing to the removal of gravel and stone. Particularly was it regrettable that some of those small beautiful mountains around the City of Auckland had been completely spoiled from a scenic point by scarves being put into the hills for the removal of stone and gravel for ballast and other purposes. This vandalism had all been done under the authority of Road Boards and County Councils. There was nothing specific in the Bill to prevent the grand old mountain of Taranaki being cut about and disfigured. No doubt the Scenery Preservation Society of Taranaki-a real live body-would see that nothing of the kind would take place. There was no necessity for the hills to be cut down ; by putting in tunnels as much metal could be obtained as was required. He thought the provisions of the Bill should go further and embrace the Mokau, one of the most beautiful rivers in New Zealand, which, if preserved with its charming bush growth, would remain, as the poet said, "a thing of beauty and a joy for ever." The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER wished to direct the attention of the Council, and of the honourable gentleman who last spoke, to the  constitution of the Board. It would be seen it was very representative of all interests, as follows :- "2. The lands described in the Schedule hereto are hereby constituted and set apart as a reserve, to be called ' the Egmont National Park,' and shall be managed and administered under this Act by a Board, to be called 'the Egmont National Park Board ' (hereinafter re- ferred to as 'the Board'), consisting of ten persons, of whom- "(1.) One shall be the person who for the time being holds the office of Com- missioner of Crown Lands for the Taranaki Land District, and he shall be the Chairman of the Board ; "(2.) Two shall be appointed by the Go- vernor ; and " (3.) One shall be appointed by each of the seven following local authorities, that is to say,- " The Hawera Borough Council ; "The New Plymouth Borough Council ; " The Taranaki County Council ; "The Hawera County Council ; "The Stratford County Council ; "The Stratford Borough Council ; and "The Opunake Town Board." The Bill proposed to give powers as regards by-laws, and the by-laws under the principal Act were subject to the approval of the Go- Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker 1 proposed to do anything to militate against the beauties of the scenery there was an opportunity for the Governor in Council to refuse their proposals and protect the scenery. As re- gards tunnelling into the mountain, he did not know whether it was necessary, as he believed there was a tremendous quantity of debris carried down which was available for road purposes, and which could be removed with- out the destruction of the scenery. It would be hurtful to the district if any provision were included in the Bill which would prevent them getting the material which nature had placed at their disposal for the maintenance and con- struction of roads. Bill read the second time. The Council adjourned at a quarter to three o'clock p.m. # HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Tuesday, 22nd October, 1901. Counties Bill - Excessive Drinking by Maoris - Eleanor Ward-Commonwealth Tariff-Public- school Teachers' Salaries Bill-Despatches be- tween Governor and Home Authorities-Mrs. Charity W. Gauntlett-The Federal Tariff - Land Boards-Members of Parliament in Pnl- lic Positions-Forest Gate Estate-Clive Rifle Volunteers-Principles of Warfare-Export Duty on Balk Timber -Steamers between New Zea- land and South Africa -Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act-Commonwealth Tariff- Waimate High School Cadet Corps-Drillshed at Fairlie for Mackenzie Mounted Rifles-Per- manent Militia Uniforms-Legislative Council Appointments-Order of Business - Returns- Legislative Council Appointments - Chatham Islands-Alleged Excessive Drinking of Tara- naki Maoris-l'upuke Lake-Rangitoto Island- Torotoros and Taurutu Lagoons-Drunkenness at Taihape - State Coal-mines - State Coal- mine-Inspector of Prisons-Hunua Coal Area- Drunkenuess at Poolburn - Frechold - Native Timber-Pariroa Native Reserve Bill-Order of Business-Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill -Public Works Statement. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER took the chair at half- past two o'clock. PRAYERS. COUNTIES BILL. Mr. McNAB (Mataura) .- Sir, I wish to bring up the following report on the Counties Bill from the Local Government Committee :- "The Local Government Committee, to whom was referred the above-mentioned Bill. have the honour to report that they have passed the following resolutions, namely :- "1. That this Committee proceed no further with the Counties Bill, and that this decision be reported to the House. "2. That the Bill as amended, and the above resolution, be reported this day. "ROBERT MCNAB, Chairman. "22nd October, 1901." I move, That the report, with the evidence taken by the Committee and the minutes of the proceedings of the Committee, do lic on 
<page>581</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=621</url>
a memorandum received by myself from Mr. Martin, containing the clauses that gentleman had been asked to draft under instructions from the Committee, do also lie on the table, so as to give full information to the House as to the position of the Bill. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) .- Is it understood that the minutes and the evidence will be printed ? Mr. SEDDON .- Not the evidence ; it will take too long, and block the Bill. Mr. MASSEY .- I think the evidence ought to be printed for the information of members. It is a motion that, I consider, should come from the Government benches, but, as the Pre- mier will not move it, I beg to move, as an amendment, That the words "and that the evidence be printed " be added to the motion. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) .- Although a city member, I regret very much indeed the failure of the Committee, and that after weeks and weeks of labour they are not able to bring in a more satisfactory report to the House. It does not reflect very much credit upon them. The Bill may not, perhaps, have met with their approval ; but we had a very big Bill last year dealing with Municipal Corporations, and we have put that system of government upon a very satisfactory footing. This Bill proposed to deal with the country local bodies, and some- thing requires to be done very badly. I believe it is to the sincere regret of the Chairman that the Committee have brought that report to the House, and I believe his regret will be shared  in by a very large number of members. It seems to me that what we should do is to set up another Committee, and let them start straight away. For my part, I should be glad #cc-zero to act on the Committee. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- I also desire to express my regret at nothing practically being done ; but the best thing I think that could have happened has happened, because, although my little Bill is in a very mangled form com- pared with what it was when it left here, it has escaped its step-mother and got back again in the House, and there may be more vitality about it than perhaps some members suspect. At all events, there is the report of the Com- mittee ; and there is no use, as far as I can see, attempting to go much further with the Bill if the amendments made in Committee are sup- ported by a majority in the House. I think the best thing has happened. Members see, at all events, the views of the Committee so far as they have gone, and Mr. Martin himself says that, with the change in the policy laid down by the Committee, he could not get the Bill ready this session ; and, even supposing it could be ready, I would not attempt to pass it in that form. Mr. SYMES (Egmont) .- I think it is a very good thing indeed that the Bill, as it is at pre- sent, is dropped. We wanted at the start a Counties Bill, and not a hybrid Bill that is neither one thing nor another. This would not put the counties any further forward than they are at the present time. No one in this House | mittee attempted to solve the problem whatever local government reform, but, as I have said, this Bill is neither one thing nor another. It seems to me that whenever we attempt any- thing like reform we have members who feel for their pocket and say, "You must not do that." I say it should have been a Counties Bill only, and that we should have started out with that notion, instead of with a desire to get every- thing under the sun, and then getting nothing worth having even if we passed it. It does not give any more assured finance than there is at present. There is no attempt to give an assured finance. The only thing it would do-and for this we may say "Thank you for nothing,"- is that it would give the present local bodies power to increase the rates upon them- selves, and to expend their own money, so that we had better have nothing than some- thing like that. I think that, if it has done no other good, the labours of the Commit- tee so far have shown the folly of trying to have a Counties Bill, a Road Boards Bill, and a Town Districts Bill all in one, and calling it a Counties Bill, instead of bringing down a con- solidating Bill. If we had started with the object and intention of reform in this direction we might have had a Counties Bill, as it is the desire that the Town District and Road District Bills should be brought down dealing separately with these local governing bodies; but the notion members had was to cram all into this Bill and to say, " You must not have reform, because you are going to hurt some one." I never heard of a reform yet but some one was going to be hurt a little by it. I think the best thing that can be done is to drop this Bill in its present form, with a view of bringing down a Bill or Bills dealing with this question, that will meet with the approval of the country, early next session. Mr. TANNER (Avon). - One cannot help thinking that the position in which this ques- tion is now revealed shows the wisdom of the House during the last three or four sessions in dealing with the question of municipal govern- ment and the question of municipal franchise absolutely apart from the wider question of the local government of the colony. If things had remained as they were five or six years ago, when the two subjects were inextricably bound up together in the proposals then mooted, we should at the present time have made abso- lutely no progress either with municipal or county reform. I think the House acted wisely two or three years ago in dividing the subjects, and in dealing first with the question of municipal franchise and afterwards, by means of a large Committee, with the subject of municipal government, and finally in that way getting one-half of the task fairly achieved. I regret very much the report that has been brought down by the Chairman of the Counties Bill Committee to-day, but, knowing as I do the indefatigable energy of that gentleman, his aptitude and attention to detail, it would be unfair in the highest degree to attach any blame to him, and it is fair to assume that the Com- 
<page>582</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=622</url>
What reasons they have at present for coming to the decision that the task is practically an im- possible one for them I am not in a position to divine. Like all private members of the House, I know nothing of the proceedings of Com- mittees of which I am not a member till the Committees report, and therefore I am unable to say what may have taken place. But I know that the disposition of the House at the beginning was to pass some simple, straight- forward measure which would have largely reduced the number of local bodies at present exercising jurisdiction in the colony, some of which are overlapping each other's areas, and so falling in conflict with each other. Why the Committee should not be able to achieve that, of course, I am at a loss to say. An Hon. MEMBER .- If you had been on the Committee you would have known. Mr. TANNER .- I suppose I would. The Committee was certainly large enough for the purpose-it comprised about thirty members. But it may be that the Committee was too large and unwieldy, and when a very large Committee takes work of this kind in hand there is always a fear haunting one's mind that the ultimate decision is not the decision of the majority. The fact is that when a Committee is numeri- cally large the attendance is seldom a majority of the membership of the Committee, and it may be that decisions are arrived at one day which are frequently reversed later on by the appearance of members not previously present. Whether that is so or not I do not presume to say. It appears that there has been some  entire change made in the line of policy origin- ally laid down in the Bill; and that rather strengthens my assumption. In any case, I can only bitterly regret that the subject which above all other subjects is required to be dealt with in this colony, that of its internal local government, stands a very good chance of being once more relegated to the future, after having been before the House in one form or another since the introduction of the first Local Autho- rities Bill in 1894. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty). - The honourable member who has just spoken was not on the Committee, nor was the honour- able member for Christchurch City (Mr. Ell), and they are both city members. An Hon. MEMBER .- No, no; small farmers' men. Mr. HERRIES .- Well, I think they have more acquaintance with municipal matters than with the methods of County Councils and Road Boards. The Committee that was set up was, I believe, a Committee of experts. All the members of that Committee have been connected with the local government of the country, and we found the difficulties con nected with the Bill almost superhuman, because we found, judging by the opinions of our constituents, that there was not a general desire that most of the local bodies, except County Councils, should be done a way with as was proposed in the Premier's Bill. I trust that the evidence and the replies we received Mr. Tanner If that is done, honourable members will see that it was not the wish of the local bodies to commit the happy despatch which they were supposed to do by this Bill. When ^e consult our constituents and those interested in the Bill, we will find that the majority do not want this change. In that case, what are we to do ? We do not want to give them a change contrary to their opinions and wishes, because that would be unpopular in the country. I think most country members will agree with me that the small local bodies are doing good work, and . there is no good reason shown why they should be abolished. Mr. SEDDON .- Too many of them. Mr. HERRIES .- There may be too many of them ; but it is better to have too many than to have too few. Mr. Martin, the solicitor, said, in view of the amendments that had been made in Committee, the whole character of the Bill had been altered. He said he had drawn up this Bill to do away with all the small local bodies and to make the counties the only work- ing bodies. Now, we altered all that by putting back these smaller local bodies into the posi- tion they occupied previously, and the con- sequence was that the whole understructure of the Bill was taken away. Mr. Martin then stated to the Chairman of the Committee that there was no use in going on with the Bill -that if the Committee wanted a consolidating mea- sure -- since with Road Boards, town districts, and counties simply as they are it would simply be a consolidating measure - it would be better to start de novo with a new Bill. That is the course that was adopted by the Com- mittee. We found that we had to put back in the Bill various local bodies, under pressure from our constituents, and from people whose advice we asked, and from our own inclination. We had to put back those bodies, and our labours ended simply in the direction of making this Bill a consolidating measure. It would be far better, in order to have a good measure, to have a Consolidation Bill drawn up by an expert like Mr. Martin next session, instead of having a consolidation measure thrust into the skin of a Bill of this kind. I must say-and I think the Chairman will bear me out-that, though the Committee was a large one, the attendance very often was very meagre. Other Committees were sitting; and on days when there were morning sittings of the House the Committee could not sit. I think that a Committee like this ought to meet almost every day to get through a Bill of this importance. Of course, owing to morning sittings of the House there was only one day on which the Committee could work in the week, so that it was almost impos- sible to get a good attendance of members to work on this Bill. I trust if the Bill is brought down next session that the Premier will appoint a Committee to go through it. Mr. SEDDON. - Never again will I submit any Bill to so large a Committee. Mr. HERRIES .- I can only assure the right honourable gentleman that if we had had the same discussion in the House that we have 
<page>583</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=623</url>
till Christmas. Mr. SEDDON .- You might be sitting here yet. Mr. HERRIES .-- Lthink the Premier showed his wisdom in sending the Bill to the Com- mittee, and I trust that when the Bill is brought in again, it will be similarly dealt with ; be- cause it is better to send it to a Committee and thus save the time of the House in discuss- ing the details of the measure. Mr. HOGG (Masterton) .- As a member of the Counties Committee I do not wish to throw the slightest discredit on my colleagues. I admit that they brought their best judgment to bear on the Bill, and that they did a great amount of arduous labour. At the same time I think it will be admitted by members of the .Committee themselves that they acted very well the part of a jibbing horse-they had no incli- nation to make much advance. The result is .that the Bill, with all its amendments, ap- pears in a most imperfect shape. A whole .series of clauses were passed in a most con- venient way, because they were too formidable to be tackled. There are some very good pro- visions amongst the proposals that the mem- bers of the Counties Committee have evolved, .and one of them is to throw as much power as possible into the hands of the people. I believe that a majority of the Committee are adverse to the proposal to strangle any of the smaller bodies, no matter how limited their size may be, if they are well managed and the rate- payers and those concerned have confidence in them. I do not see why these bodies should be taken by the neck and strangled without a fair trial. My wish is to see a Local Government Bill introduced of such a character that the people themselves, whose interests are con- cerned, will be enabled to rectify any things that require adjustment by a simple and convenient process. Where the local bodies are too small the electors should have the power of amalga- mating, and, were it necessary to convert, say, a road district into a county, the people should be able to do that by simply sending a petition to the Governor in Council, without having to come to this House and get a Bill passed for the purpose. One of the most formidable stumbling blocks in the way of passing this Counties Bill has been the question of the franchise; and as this question lies at the basis of all reform, and apparently the Counties Committee does not care to deal with it, then it is advisable that the House should tackle the Bill itself and go through with it. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo). - My .opinion is that the country will not receive with much regret the news as to the position of this Bill. I have got communications from .some Chairmen of County Councils, and they say that they think that the present Act works .very satisfactorily, and therefore I think they will receive the fate of this Bill with feelings of satisfaction. There is no doubt that there is a great deal connected with the measure of a good character. I can understand small local bodies objeeting to be wiped out, as was con- matter of very great regret that we did not have the member for Christchurch City (Mr. Ell) and the member for Avon on the Com- mittee. I think if we had had them on the Committee they would have evolved order out of chaos ; and it seems to me that what should be done in future in connection with legislation for country districts should be to appoint a Committee of members representing the towns, as it is evident, in the opinion of our city friends, that country men know nothing of county work. For instance, I venture to say that the member for Auckland City (Mr. Napier), the authority on naval defence, would bring down a measure which would satisfy this House. The Premier has indicated the possi- bility of our sitting till Christmas. Perhaps he might notify to the House an adjournment for a few days, in order that members might make arrangements to attend the Christchurch Show. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) .- Although a member of the Committee, I venture to say that the labours of that Committee have not been thrown away, and they have done a great deal of good during their sittings. They have inquired from local bodies in their constituen- cies what they wished to do in regard to this Bill, and they have followed their wishes as far as they could ; and if the local bodies are to blame for sending these instructions to the Committee, then we shall know more about it when we face our constituents after the session, and will ascertain how to continue the work of the Bill next session. The member for Master- ton said that the Committee did not face the question of the franchise. We never reached that point. There were several meetings called specially to discuss that question, but in conse- quence of the late sittings at the time the estimates were under discussion, and for other reasons, the Committee never met to consider that matter. That was no stumbling. block, and I believe the question would have been faced as well as any other question had the Committee reached it. Mr. W. FRASER (Wakatipu) .- Sir, 3.0. the honourable member for Masterton has told the House the Committee seemed to have no heart in its work, and there is a good deal of truth in that statement. Why was it so? Because those sitting on the Com- mittee found that there was no intention what- ever on the part of the Government to give the one thing that would make a Local Govern- ment Bill of value to the colony, and that is an assured finance. We were told distinctly that no alteration of the finance that existed in the past would appear in this Bill, and the Premier told us there was not the slightest hope of any more subsidy being available. In the face of that the Committee thought that, although there might be some improvement made with regard to the existing state of affairs in a few minor respects, what the country really wanted was an efficient system of local government with extended powers and an assured finance. But that is not what we are going to get at all by the measure before us. 
<page>584</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=624</url>
all the numerous bodies. The revenue of many of these Road Boards does not amount to more than £100 a year. Mr. W. FRASER .- I quite agree that it is a very difficult question ; but I say, if you are going to deal with this question of local govern- ment, you ought to deal with it as a whole, and not piecemeal. We should have a comprehen- sive measure which would embrace all the salient points, such as finance, the franchise, and the size of the local bodies, and also the powers to be given to the local bodies. What I am afraid of is that the House will be asked to express an opinion upon all these points separately. The question should be dealt with as a whole, and not piecemeal ; and if this Bill is forced through now it will simply be the old Counties Act with one alteration, possibly, and that is the question of the franchise. So far as I am concerned, I have no hesitation in saying I am prepared to extend the franchise very considerably. Since local government has been granted to this colony, at any rate, in the county in which I lived for a great number of years, and in the local government of which I took part, the franchise was a very wide one. Under the miner's right a man, by paying 5s. or 10s. a year, could exercise a vote, and I may say I never saw the slightest desire or attempt on the part of any of those persons to do any- thing which would be in any way inimical to the best interests of that county. Hence I have no fear of results that may accrue from extending the franchise.  Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) .- Sir, as a member who attended regularly at the various delibera- tions of the Counties Committee, I should like to say a word or two upon this measure, not that I can throw any fresh light on the matter, but merely to give reasons why the Committee report against the Bill. The weakness of this Bill, I consider, is the apparent attempt to make larger local bodies more popular. There is a strong feeling amongst the British public, both at Home and in the colonies, that Home Rule is desirable. Every Road Board feels that, with the economical administration that has been exercised in the past, they have done very good work indeed, and they do not consider that matters would be improved by throwing in their lot with amalgamated Road Boards or County Councils. I do not see any hope in the near future of a Bill on the same lines as this Counties Bill being passed, unless there is an attempt to get it along easier lines. Owing to the peculiar features of some of the Road Board districts, which are divided by rivers or moun- tain-ranges, there is not sufficient community of interest to warrant a general desire for amal- gamation, and unless some advantages are to be gained there is no reason why they should. A more general form of local government, I believe, is desirable ; but I do not think it will be obtained by amalgamating local bodies, such as Road Boards, water-supply, or drainage dis- tricts. There is apparently a strong inclination on the part of the Road Boards to remain as they are under any name, believing that the best Owing to the rapid increase of population in our counties many of these bodies will become almost unwieldy in the near future, and the government of such a local body must be situate a consider- able distance away from some parts of the county, and, I feel certain, unable to give the same close attention to local requirements as can be obtained from a Board administering a smaller area. I agree with the report that the Bill should not be proceeded with. Mr. LANG (Waikato) .- I do not think, Sir, the fault lies with the Committee, but with the Premier, because of the form in which the Bill was brought before the Committee. That is where the whole trouble has arisen. The Premier sought to force the County Council system of local government upon the ratepayers, and endeavoured to wipe out the Road Boards. If honourable members will take the trouble to read the evidence placed before the Committee they will see that in the colony there are a large number of Road Boards, some of them in districts in which the Counties Act has not been brought into operation. These have been in existence for a number of years, and have been administered to the satisfaction of the people concerned, and they naturally resent any attempt to wipe them out. About eight or ten years ago the Premier promised to bring in a Local Government Bill, to provide an assured finance and reduce the number of local bodies, but nothing to speak of has been done, so far as this Bill is concerned, in providing an assured finance. Now, I think the Premier should have faced the matter boldly by bringing down a Bill to wipe all the existing local bodies out of existence. He should then have recon- stituted the local bodies in the different localities, and stated what size each local body should be. It would not matter whether they were called County Councils or Road Boards. Per- haps it would be wiser neither to call them one or the other, so as to do away with the feeling of jealousy that exists between these local bodies. If that were done it would enable people in some parts of the colony, where it is desirable, to have small local bodies, and in other parts of the colony, where it was suitable, to have larger local bodies. Now, the Premier made some remark about the small Road Boards, where the revenue was under $100. Sir, in many cases these local bodies are worked more cheaply, and with better results, than a great many of the large ones; and I think it would be more satisfactory to the people con- cerned to leave them as they are, rather than force them to accept a particular form of go- vernment that they do not require. I do not think, myself, that the work of the Committee has been thrown away. It has opened the eyes of a large number of members to the existence of a state of things in parts of the colony they had no idea of before, and, if this report is brought down, and the evidence published, not only members of the House but the people generally will understand the position better than they did before ; and in the meantime I think members will agree that the matter should be left as it is. 
<page>585</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=625</url>
Mr. MONK (Waitemata) .- With regard to is satisfactorily solved, something of the kind I the proposition in this Bill to abolish the small have suggested will have to take place. local bodies, such as the Town and Road Boards, mitted to the Committee was a different Bill I may say I have from my own electorate been to the Bill laid on the table. The trouble is asked to put forth strenuous opposition to the abolition of any one of them. The residents of that the country was not ripe for the proposed such seem to have been become used to the measure. Every member on the Committee, form of local government they have adopted, and and, I believe, every member of the House, must have received petition after petition and tele- they do not desire to experiment, as suggested by the Bill, in any other form of local .govern- gram after telegram against this Bill in some ment. But what they did desire was a form of of its many aspects; and witnesses brought government and a Bill which would take up before the Committee gave evidence, and clearly the care of their main roads, and also give to demonstrated to their own satisfaction and to them automatic finance. They object to the the satisfaction of the Committee, it was not in principle of having to go to the Government the best interest of local government to inter- and solicit financial assistance. They feel that fere with existing Road Boards and town dis- as taxpayers they have contributed to the tricts. So strong was the feeling of a number of consolidated revenue large sums of money, and members of the Committee on the latter sub- they would like to have the amount which is to ject that they went so far as to have the Town be returned to them to operate automatically, District Act re-enacted, so that town districts and not at the instance of the Ministry of the may become local centres in the future as in day. I am quite sure honourable members the past. Members were almost unanimously realise that there is something debasing in the against the merging of town districts as in the position of a member of this House having Counties Bill. I did hope that the Govern- to solicit from the Ministry of the day that ment would have brought down a comprehen- which they feel they ought to receive as a sive Local Authorities Bill, with a provision that those local bodies would be provided with an right, and they should not be under any ob- ligation in receiving it. But here, again, the assured finance. That would have enabled them Government are confronted with a great diffi- to have gone in for a comprehensive scheme for culty, because so many of the local bodies in roads and bridges, opening up the country, and the colony are in an independent position. developing its resources, without having to come, hat in hand, to the Government for the For instance, the honourable member for Avon said he does not require any contribution from necessary funds ; and I am perfectly certain, from what I know of the local bodies, had the Government. They have beautiful roads in his district, and any one passing over the the means been placed at their disposal the  Canterbury Plains will see that the roads work would be done with greater efficiency and there are in a magnicfient condition. But if more economy than it is now done by the the honourable member only travelled in some Minister of Lands or the Minister for Public Works. But there was an entire absence in the of the northern counties, and in some of the districts lately settled by the Government, he Bill of anything in the shape of financial assist- will find that the formation of roads is their ance. Again, the whole of the Road Boards and very life. It is everything to them ; and it the whole of the town districts obiect to be abolished and merged into the Counties Bill. will be necessary, I think, before an efficient The Road Boards and Town Boards have in Counties Act can be contrived, for a Commis- sion to go through the Island and determine the past done their work in a most satisfactory what roads shall receive special assistance and and economical manner. I am unable to see what districts do not require any contribution any good reason that they should be merged from the consolidated revenue. Honourable and replaced by a very doubtful measure, that might cause no end of friction. I am not in a members can tell us that some of the districts position to say that it might not be prudent to down south have money actually lying out at interest. Well, they are in no need at all of have applied the Bill to new districts where no local bodies exist at the present time. But in assistance. But you will find others, again, order to do that successfully they must have an where the settlers in the winter time are floun- assured finance ; and, when I remember the high dering up to their knees in impassable roads, sums voted by this House when it resolves itself and are not able to get their produce out to into a great Road Board, I cannot help thinking market. No Government will secure an effi- that an efficient system of local government is cient Bill for administration by local bodies without having what I have suggested-a care- absolutely necessary. One of the reasons why I have supported the continuance of town districts ful survey, so to speak, of the needs of each district, and having special legislation to meet is because I think they are very useful bodies. the requirements of each of them. That is And, again, I think road districts have a right to where the difficulty comes in, so I am sure the exist where they have carried on satisfactorily Ministry could not appoint thirty or forty mem- for many years past. On the whole, I am not bers, as they have done, out of this House to sit at all sorry that the Bill has met its fate at the in consideration of the proposed Local Bodies hands of the Committee. Should it come Bill without being confronted by an intermin- before the House again I trust it will be in able variety of interests and conceptions as to the true interest of the country. the nature which a local legislature should as- may be refreshing to honourable members to sume. And I am sure that, before this question Mr. McGUIRE (Hawera) .- The Bill sub- Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines). - It 
<page>586</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=626</url>
hear the opinion of one who has not been a member of that Committee. I wish to say that the discussion I have just heard has been interesting and instructive, inasmuch as each member admits that there has been and is a necessity for a change and simplification in our system of local government; and, if we hark back to the position in regard to the Municipal Government Bill, we will recollect that it was recommended that this Bill should be sent to a Committee, in order that all the interests in- volved should be looked after and a good Bill reported to the House. The same course was recommended when this particular Bill was brought down to the House, and a large Com- mittee appointed ; and with what result? The only result has been that this afternoon honour- able members have blamed the Premier for not putting a better Bill before them. In other words, they have blamed the Premier for not having provided what they themselves ought to have provided in this Committee- namely, the suggested amendments and improvements which the Committee think should be in- corporated in the Bill. Now, the whole of the members of this Committee are men who are presumed to be well acquainted with the local government matters in the different districts ; yet these gentlemen, from some cause or another which I do not know, were not pre- pared to bring down a single resolution to wipe out any of the local bodies at all. They simply wished to throw the Bill back on the Premier, in order to provide what they call "assured finance." Why, there would be no trouble at all in dealing with a Bill of this kind if, first of all, there was an assured finance. A Bill of this kind is a difficult one to deal with, I think every one admits, and it is for that reason that   the Bill was sent to the Committee. Now, I would like to ask if the result is satisfactory. I do not think it is ; and I think, after all, the Premier will have to take this Bill over him- self, because it is quite evident the Committee chosen from this House has been incapable of dealing with the subject in the way the House desires, and the House, as a Committee of the Whole, will require to discuss the matter, in order that an acceptable measure may be presented to the country. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) .- I think that is hardly fair to the Committee. The result was this: The Committee dealt with the Bill, and put it in such a shape that it required redraft- ing altogether. Mr. Martin, who drafted the Bill, said it could not possibly be put in shape without starting ab initio, and that he would not have time to do it before the session ended. That is the reason why the work of the Com- mittee has been lost. Amendment agreed to, and motion as amended agreed to. EXCESSIVE DRINKING BY MAORIS. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) brought up a re- port from the Public Petitions M to Z Com- mittee upon the petitions of Edward Marfell and three others, of New Plymouth, and H. J. White and seven others, of Wellington, praying Mr. McGowan allegations as to the excessive drinking indulged in by Maoris in the Taranaki District at tangis and huis, et cetera ; and moved, That the report do lie on the table, and be referred to the Go- vernment for consideration. The report, which was read by the CLERK, stated that the evidence given before the Com- mittee showed that alcoholic liquors were largely consumed at tangis and huis by the Natives in the Taranaki D strict; that there appeared to be no difficulty in obtaining liquor in large quantities; that the orgies that some- times occurred at tangis and huis were disgrace- ful, and the general effects were physically and morally degrading ; wherefore the Committee recommended that legislation be introduced with a view of restricting the sale of alcoholic liquors to the Native race. Motion agreed to. ELEANOR WARD. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) brought up a re- port from the Public Petitions M to Z Com- mittee on the petitions of Eleanor Ward and A. Hattrick, of Wanganui, praying that a compassionate allowance might be granted to Eleanor Ward, widow of the late Judge Robert Ward ; and moved, That the report do lie on the table, and be referred to the Government for consideration. The report, which was read by the CLERK, stated that the Committee recommended that the petitions be referred to the Government for favourable consideration. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) trusted the Government would really take this petition into their favourable consideration. The facts of the matter had been fully set forth in writing and by evidence, and he was sure that the bulk of members of the House, if they made them- selves acquainted with the facts, would agree that this was a petition which most certainly ought to be favourably considered by the Cabinet. Motion agreed to. COMMONWEALTH TARIFF. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) asked the Premier, If he will inquire from the organiza- tions representing the small farmers their opin- ion regarding the Commonwealth tariff, as well as from the Chambers of Commerce, which largely represent the importing interests ? He need not speak of the importance at- tached to the Commonwealth tariff, so far as it affected numbers of the small farmers in the South Island ; and, as the Premier was making inquiries from the Chambers of Com- merce on the subject, his question was put with the view of insuring that, as far as pos- sible, the interests of the small farmers would be consulted through any organization there might be which specially represented them. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) would be only too pleased to hear from the farmers, either collec- tively through any organizations which existed or individually. It was his duty, as it was his desire, to gather as far as he could public opin- 
<page>587</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=627</url>
ion, and more particularly on this question, as regard to the reply which had been sent to the it affected the producers of the colony very materially ; so he would be most happy to have any information that the farmers liked to place before him. He could only assure the House and the country that he would give the fullest consideration to any communications that were sent to him. PUBLIC-SCHOOL TEACHERS' SALARIES BILL. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) asked the Govern- ment, Whether it is their intention to place the Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill on the statute-book during the present session ? He noticed on the corrected Order Paper for to-day that the Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill was second on the list. On the proof Order gentleman was rather peculiar in his expres- Paper, however, it was No. 21 on the list. He was satisfied now the Government intended day he was the " Bull of Bashan," and now he to go on with this measure, and he hoped the was to be a fish; not, however, a jellyfish, or Premier would give him the assurance that he meant to place it on the statute-book this session. It was only dealing out justice to a very deserving section of public servants. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) hoped they would have the second reading of the Bill carried to- night, and he was quite prepared to take it into Committee and get it through. He thought to the Secretary of the Cabinet, and they were that period of the session had now arrived when sent on to the printer. So far as he knew, they might go into Committee immediately after reading a Bill a second time. He re- gretted that the Press representatives in the that the despatches were with the Government gallery had given it out that he had said he only intended to take the second reading of the Bill.  He never said anything of the sort. He said honourable gentleman would say whether it that he was going to proceed with the Bill. He office as Governor was to be extended. regretted the error, because it had cost the teachers throughout the colony a large sum of was well within his rights in asking that ques- money in telegrams. tion. He could not say whether the term was DESPATCHES BETWEEN GOVERNOR to be extended or not, but he hoped it would. AND HOME AUTHORITIES. The Government had made representations to Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) asked the the Colonial Office, and stated that, in their Premier, Why no despatches between His opinion, it would be pleasing to the people of Excellency the Governor and the Home autho- this colony that His Excellency should be re- rities later than the 9th November and the tained for another term. 22nd December, 1900, respectively, have been laid before Parliament? So far as he was consulted ? aware, the only papers relating to despatches between this colony and the Home Government be very unusual. were A .- 1 and A .- 2. A .- 1 consisted of des- patches down to only the 22nd December of last year, while A .- 2 consisted of despatches coming down only to the 9th November of last Government, Whether they will place on the supplementary estimates a compassionate al- year. In other words, they were nearly twelve months behind with the information which lowance for Mrs. Charity W. Gauntlett, wife honourable members were entitled to with regard of Torpedoman Gauntlett, who died as the re- sult of an accident while in the service of the to communications which had passed between the Government and the Home authorities. On corps? He had presented a petition to the two or three occasions matters of importance House this session on behalf of Mrs. Gauntlett, comprised in these communications had been in which the petitioner prayed for compensation referred to in the House. The other day the for loss of her husband ; and the Committee member for Ashley put a question, which the had reported that the petition be referred to Premier thought was a fishing expedition, in the Government for favourable consideration. regard to the correspondence that had taken place on the question of precedence ; and last Gauntlett was paid £137 17s. 6d., being a sum equal to one year's salary of her late husband. night the member for the Bay of Plenty in- effectually endeavoured to fish the Premier in The late corporal died on the 1st March, 1899. Government on the subject of the New Zealand ensign, and apparently the member for 3.30. the Bay of Plenty assumed that the reasons that were given in the published cor- respondence between the Deputy Governor and the Premier were those that had led the Home authorities to veto the New Zealand Ensign Bill. The Premier, who had later information, had assured the House that that was not the reason. He had put this question with the object of eliciting some information as to why these despatches were withheld from the House. They ought to have the despatches for at least six months later than those that were on the table. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the honourable sions in regard to himself (Mr. Seddon). One one to be caught by every bait. He thought it would take very strong lines and very tempting bait to draw him if he was to be placed in that category. The position, as far as he knew, was that all the despatches were sorted out, and, in fact, he was not consulted about them at all. They came down from His Excellency there was nothing to keep them back, and he would make inquiries. It was just possible Printer. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) asked if the was true or not that Lord Ranfurly's term of Mr. SEDDON said the honourable member Mr. J. ALLEN .- Why was not the House Mr. SEDDON said that such a course would MRS. CHARITY W. GAUNTLETT. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) asked the Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said Mrs. Charity 
<page>588</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=628</url>
corporal had been held by himself and Dr. Chapple, and they were of opinion that his illness was not due to the injury described by the late corporal, but that the malady from which, in their opinion, he died was kidney- disease. He further said that the only way to definitely settle whether the injury had any- thing to do with the death was to make a post mortem. This was not done. The case had frequently been brought up, and the opinion expressed that she had already been well treated, and her application for increased com- pensation declined. According to law, twelve months' salary was given to Civil servants, and Mrs. Gauntlett had received an amount equal to twelve months' salary, although not entitled to anything at all from the branch of the ser- vice in which her husband served; and he really could not see his way to promise any- thing further. At first they only gave Mrs. Gauntlett an amount equal to six months' salary, and she petitioned, and it was repre- sented to the Government that the proper thing to do would be to give her another six months' salary. That amount was given, and now she wanted more. The Government had dealt fairly with Mrs. Gauntlett, and was not prepared to do more. # THE FEDERAL TARIFF. Mr. LANG (Waikato) asked the Premier, If he will send to the farmers' unions and clubs throughout the colony similar telegrams to those sent to the Chambers of Commerce with refer- ence to the Federal tariff ? This question had been on the Order Paper for some days. His reasons for asking the question was on account of the following announcement that appeared   in the New Zealand Times a few days ago :- " In consequence of the agitation throughout the colony in reference to the Federal tariff, the Premier has telegraphed to all the Chambers of Commerce in the colony to ascertain their opinions on the subject. In the course of his telegram he said the tariff proposed by the Australian Commonwealth Government was one which had an important bearing on the colony's export trade, and the question was of such im- portance to the country that the Government was considering what steps, if any, were desir- able in order to protect the colony's trade, which, as a result of the high tariff imposed, specially against New Zealand, would be affected to some extent. He would be glad if the Chambers would confer, and favour the Govern- ment with an opinion upon the altered con- dition of things, and what effect they thought the Federal tariff would have upon the pro- ducers and export trade of the colony. He would also be glad to receive any suggestions or proposals the Chambers might agree upon in connection with the question before it was finally discussed in Cabinet." He was aware that the Premier had replied to a somewhat similar question that afternoon, but he was sorry that the Premier had not seen his way in the first place to communicate with farmers' unions and clubs in the same way Mr. Seddon Commerce. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said, When he sent out the first telegrams expedition was neces- sary, and he desired replies to come as soon as possible. However, the answer he had given the member for Riccarton would apply to this question. # LAND BOARDS. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) asked the Government, Whether they will give effect to the wish of the House, as expressed by a vote of the Committee of the whole House, and can- cel all appointments of members of Parliament on Land Boards ? He would only point out that, when the estimates were in Committee a few nights ago, the item "Fees to members of Waste Lands Boards," was reduced by £2, as an intimation to the Government that, in future, members of the House should not be appointed to the Land Boards of the colony. That amendment was carried on the voices ; and he thought he would ask the Premier when he would give effect to the wishes of the Committee. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said it was quite evident to him that the House laid very great stress on the recommendation it had made- that members of the House should not be on the Land Boards. It was the only reduction made on the estimates, and, such being the case, he could only take it that members earnestly desired a change in this respect. He might also say it was the opinion of the late Sir John Mckenzie that it was not desirable that members of the House should sit on Land Boards. It did not help the administration at all, but rather retarded it. However, the Go- vernment did not intend to cancel the appoint- ments of those who already held seats, but, as they dropped out, the Government would con- sider whether they should reappoint them or not. # MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT IN PUBLIC POSITIONS. Mr. HOGG (Masterton) asked the Premier, If he will introduce legislation defining the public positions for which Ministers of the Crown and members of Parliament are eligible ? After the reply the Premier had given to the honourable member for Christchurch City (Mr. Collins) it was highly desirable that members of the House should know their position. As a member of a Land Board, he might say the late Minister of Lands had appointed him to the position without any request on his part. He had never made a request to be placed on that or any other Board to which the Govern- ment had the right to make appointments. He believed there were members of the House who were Justices of the Peace, Volunteer officers, School Commissioners, and members of Educa- tion Boards. Attached to some of the positions there were perquisites, but after one had paid his expenses it would require a very strict micro- scopical examination to detect what was left. For himself, he would not remain on the Land 
<page>589</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=629</url>
Board if it were not for the opportunity it gave him of helping deserving settlers. Was it not the duty as well as privilege of representatives to protect their constituents? Such members were, he might say, the buffer between the department and the settlers who needed assist- ance. Seeing that the services of members of the House were estimated on Royal Commis- sions at one-half and sometimes one-third of the value placed on the services of the general public, it was well that the position of mem- bers should be accurately defined by legislation. He believed members had the confidence of the public, otherwise they would not be sent to the House ; but, unfortunately, they had not always the confidence of their colleagues, and, as a re- sult, there was continually a squabbling going on between the "outs " and the "ins." At any rate, members who were doing their duty to the colony and the people they represented should not be subjected to gratuitous and mendacious attacks. The miserable tactics of disappointed members, supported by Ministers, made what was at best a thankless task so unbearable that he felt tempted to resign his seat on the Board. It was evident that the sooner the Government stated what positions members of the House could occupy the better it would be for all con- cerned. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) did not think there was any necessity for legislation on the matter. He did not think the fact that a man was a member of Parliament should restrict him in his actions, or that on that account he should not be open to receive any position that de-  manded his services. It was clear, however, the majority of the members of the House had a feeling that those members who were on Land Boards possessed an advantage over those mem-   bers who were not on Land Boards. The member for Masterton had admitted they had an advantage. He said he wanted to be on the Land Board so that he could look after the interests of the settlers in his district. Mr. HERRIES .- He said his " constituents." Mr. SEDDON said, That, of course, was a slip. He quite understood that members of the Opposition who were not on Land Boards would naturally like to occupy seats on those Boards to look after the interests of their con- stituents. However, they would have to wait until they occupied the Treasury benches, and no doubt, if they then appointed their friends to Land Boards, the member for Masterton and others who were now members of the Boards would complain, and would not vote for mem- bers being on Land Boards. However, he had a general knowledge of what underlay the whole thing. There was one statement he would like to make, and that was that the disqualification laws now on the statute-book were a discredit to Parliament. No doubt there were men in Parliament fitted for special work to which they might be appointed, and, as they were the elect of the people and were specially qualified, it was certainly wrong that, if they were appointed and accepted those positions, they should not receive the same reward for their services as was paid to those who VOL. CXIX .- 39. were not members of the House. It was well, of course, that there should be a limit ; but the present limit- £1 a day-was altogether, in his opinion, too little. Outsiders were paid the amount fixed by His Excellency the Governor. At all events, he had all along said, and he now repeated, that the disqualification laws required alteration, and if the House desired that that alteration should be made he was quite pre- pared to bring in a Bill to give effect to their wishes. A member of Parliament was away from his home all the session, and in the recess, if he was again called upon to leave his home to go through the country on business of special importance to the colony for a sum that barely covered his expenses, he was making a sacrifice he should not be called upon to make. Of course, he might be told these men should not be appointed, but if he were to take up that position he would many times lose the services of the best men. FOREST GATE ESTATE. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) asked the Premier, Whether, if the proprietors of the Forest Gate Estate elect not to compel the Government to take that property under the award of the Land for Settlements Compensa- tion Court, the Government propose to com- pensate the proprietors for the loss and legal and other expenses to which they have been put ; and, if so, from what vote will they ob- tain the money? This question referred to a very important matter-the acquisition by the Government of the Forest Gate Estate. Per- haps it would not be out of place if he briefly mentioned the circumstances leading up to the purchase. In the first place, he believed the estate was offered to the Government and by them declined. Subsequently the Government offered to buy the estate, and offered to the vendors the sum of £3 17s. 6d. per acre. The vendors declined this price, and the Govern- ment then offered £4 ; but the vendors asked for the sum of $4 10s. per acre, a request that was declined by the Government. In due course a sitting of the Compensation Court was held, and the Court awarded the owners of the estate £5 10s. per acre for an estate for which the Government in the first place offered £3 17s. 6d. per acre. Now, this was the extraordinary part of the position : A week ago the honourable member for Hawke's Bay (Cap- tain Russell) asked the Government whether there were any negotiations pending between the Government and the owners of the estate subsequent to the award; and the Premier, in replying, said the Government had decided to give the owners of the estate the option of retaining it. He also said this could only be done by arrangement ; but the position was ad- mitted by the Premier that the Government did not propose to enter into possession of the land unless the owners themselves declined to release them from the responsibility placed on the Government by the award of the Court. This was a very important matter. He wished to avoid matter that was arguable, but he could not help thinking the Government would 
<page>590</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=630</url>
responsibility in virtually saying that the award of the Court was either not a just one, or, in the alternative, not a competent one, because it was this tribunal which owners of estates which were compulsorily taken had to appeal to. If the Government, when an award was given which the Government might think was above the value of the land, were going to exercise this responsibility, and say, " If retain the property, you like, you can because we are dissatisfied with the award," would the Government allow the same right to owners of land which was compulsorily taken if it should turn out that the vendors thought they had not been treated fairly by the Court ? An Hon. MEMBER. - They have the same right. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL said the honourable member who made that interjection was wrong. The position was this : The Government desired compulsorily to acquire a block of land, and, whether the owner of the land was satisfied or not, he had to abide by the award. In this case the Government were compelled to abide by the award. He admitted that. But the Govern- ment now said, although they had put the law in motion to take the land, the award of the Court was such as to the value of the land that the owners could retain it if they chose. In other words, that was an admission by the Government that the Court was either incom- petent or unjust. He ventured to say that in adopting that attitude the Government were acting unwisely.  Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- The honourable gentleman must not proceed to discuss the question. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL said he wished to avoid that, but having gone so far he would like to go a little further, and to say that in giving this option to the owners the Govern- ment had, in his opinion, acted unwisely, and had struck a blow at the standing of the Court in the public mind. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- That is the very thing I asked you not to proceed with. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL said it was a ques- tion as to whether, if the owners of the estate elected to retain their land, it would not be fair to them that they should be compensated for the expense, the loss of time, and he would say the mental anxiety to which they had been put in connection with the matter. If the owners determined to retain their land, the Govern- ment should certainly recoup them for the loss they had sustained. Did the Government pro- pose to pay them for their loss ; and, if so, from what source ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said there was just one statement the honourable gentleman had made, and when he gave that an unqualified denial it would upset his calculation altogether. He had never said that if the owners refused to retain it that then the Government would not take it. He had never said anything of the kind. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Would the right honourable gentleman allow him to explain Mr. G. W. Russell sell) had said ? He had never made that state- ment. The Government were compelled to take it. Mr. SEDDON might say at once, in reference to this matter, that he would briefly review the position. First of all, the owners had come voluntarily to the Government and had offered to sell the Forest Gate Estate. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay) asked if he would be allowed to review the Premier's argument. Mr. SEDDON said he did not think the honourable gentleman had asked the question. He was simply answering the question that had been put. He would say, first of all, that the Government did not seek to take the land in the first instance. The land was offered voluntarily by the owners, and the amount of £4 10s. per acre was asked for it. The Government was prepared to give #4, so that there was only 10s. difference between the two as to the value placed upon the land by the owners themselves. That was the fact. Captain RUSSELL .- No ; that is argument ; at any rate, it is not fact. Mr. SEDDON .- I repeat, it is a fact ; and why does the honourable member interrupt ? Captain RUSSELL asked Mr. Deputy- Speaker to rule whether the Right Hon. the Premier was not departing from the Standing Orders, which prevented the introduction of arguable matter. He would be prepared to argue the matter if that were allowable. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said the honour- able gentleman must accept the Hon. the Pre- mier's assertion as to the facts. Mr. SEDDON said he could not take the honourable member's assertion. The honour- able member was not one of the owners, and he (Mr. Seddon) was speaking of facts as they were recorded in the papers. It was he (Mr. Seddon) who was making the statement, and not the honourable gentleman. Captain RUSSELL said the statement was not in accordance with the real facts of the case. Mr. DEPUTY - SPEAKER said the Hon. the Minister was entitled, in answering the question, to state the facts. Captain RUSSELL .- I say those are not the facts, and the matter becomes arguable. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said he must ask the honourable gentleman to accept the asser- tion that these were the facts. Mr. SEDDON would repeat that the owners had offered the estate to the Government at £4 10s. per acre. That was the statement he had made. Captain RUSSELL. - You said that was what they thought was the value. Mr. SEDDON said that if a person offered land at £4 10s. per acre and was prepared to take it, that seemed to him clearly the value the owner fixed upon the land when he offered to sell at that figure. Then, the question went to the Arbitration Court, because the Govern- ment were not prepared to give the £4 10s. per acre, and they found the award given by the 
<page>591</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=631</url>
than the owners had asked when they offered to sell voluntarily to the Government. Then, it was stated at the Arbitration Court that Mrs. Herrick wished to retain the estate. He sup- posed the price altered the sentiment about retaining the estate. Probably, as they were to get #1 an acre more than they had been pre- pared to take for it, the original sentiment dis- appeared. At all events, that sentiment had been expressed in Court, and the Government simply asked the question, " Do you still wish to retain it?" intimating that, if they did, they would endeavour to arrange so that that could be done. He could see no harm in that. Mr. R. THOMPSON .- Have you received a reply to that ? Mr. SEDDON said, Yes, practically, because he was informed that they were astonished themselves at the price they had got ; and when it was said by one on the Government side, "I suppose now you will keep the estate ?" the answer was, " Oh, no; it is too good." Captain RUSSELL .- This is not fair, and I protest against the liberty that is allowed the Premier. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said the Premier had not so far gone beyond the Standing Orders. Mr. SEDDON said, Then, there was another feature in connection with it, which was this : that for 500 acres of this estate, which the colony had now to pay for, the owner had never paid a single sixpence to the colony or any one else for the land. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- That is debat- able matter. Mr. SEDDON thought that probably getting 500 acres in that way was material, but he #cc-zero wanted to keep within the Standing Orders. What had led to the conclusion the Govern- ment had arrived at was this : that the settlers that went upon the land would for all time have to pay too much for it, and so would suffer. That was the serious part of the whole thing. The point raised by the member for Riccarton brought out the fact that there should be some alteration of the law. As matters stood now, evidence was given as to sale of adjoining property, and it was stated that that was the basis of this sale. Since then the Government had the records and the re- gister, and there had been no sale at all. It was hearsay that there had been a sale. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- The honourable member is going beyond the limits of the ques- tion asked. Mr. SEDDON said he understood the honour- able gentleman was raising the question as to whether the Government could make the offer, and, if the offer were made, how they were going to do it. If any money had to be paid by way of compensation the costs would go with it, and the costs were fixed by the Court. They should certainly pay the costs, and he would be prepared to give a little more than the costs to get out. But he must comply with the law, and the Government must issue an order to take possession. At the same time, it pointed were to be charged for all time with value that was not in the land, it was a very serious thing, and the question was whether the law should be altered to give some relief. The Government intended to comply with the law. # CLIVE RIFLE VOLUNTEERS. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay) asked the Minister of Defence, If he will state the causes which led to the disbanding of the Clive Ritle Volunteers? Some time ago he had been led to understand that the services of the Clive Volunteers had been dispensed with ; and, so far, although he had taken a great deal of trouble in the matter, he had been unable to ascertain from authority for what reason. They themselves had never been informed; they simply knew that their services had been dis- pensed with, and he was anxious to get for them an answer why. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defenec) said the Clive Rifle Volunteers committed an act of in- subordination by signing a round-robin calling upon the captain to resign. An inquiry was held into the matter, and the disbandment of the corps was recommended by the Officer Com- manding the district to the Commandant, who indorsed the recommendation, and the disband- ment of the corps was approved. PRINCIPLES OF WARFARE. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) asked the Minister of Defence, Whether the Government will appoint a military expert to examine into the principles of warfare outlined in an article written by Mr. W. J. Napier, and published in the New Zealand Times of Wednesday, the 9th October, with a view to discover in what respects those principles differ from the principles of warfare as laid down in Napier's "History of the Peninsular War "? Follow- ing on the lines of Lord Brassey, Mr. W. J. Napier, in a communication which appeared in the New Zealand Times of the 9th October, had exhaustively criticized the state of the English navy, and, generally, the unprepared- ness of England should she become in- volved in war with any other nation. That criticism had evoked from certain competent authorities, styled respectively "Archer " and "Nemesis," very able, not to say caustic, criticisms on the criticisms of the critic. But, as "Nemesis" pointed out, the tactics of Mr. Napier had been so trenchantly dealt with by the other critic styled " Archer," that he did not apply the scalping-knife in such a manner as he would otherwise have thought justifiable. But the "stupendously foolish " action of the English Government, which formed so large a part of the criticism of Mr. Napier, had so far escaped the observation of all the war ex- perts whose business it was to discover where any weakness lay. The opinion of Mr. Napier, that " England's fighting-capacity was at pre- sent a negligeable quantity" might lead to the impression that England at the present moment was not in that state of preparedness in which a first-class Power ought to be; but 
<page>592</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=632</url>
that England was never better prepared. Putting aside for a moment a reference he found in the criticism of " Nemesis" to the effect that the tactics employed by Methuen at the Modder and at Magersfontein were on precisely the same principle as that in vogue in Germany, he came to the prin- ciples of war, which might now be called ancient or antique, of General Sir Charles Napier, K.C.B. He found there a distinct and considerable divergence of opinion as to the tactics which should be adopted in warfare on land laid down by Sir Charles Napler as ap- plicable to the Peninsular War and the tactics prescribed for adoption by Mr. Napier in the event of England becoming involved in war. It was suggested by an honourable member that the presence of a celebrated general, Sir Hector Macdonald, who was now in New Zealand, might enable them to take his opinion on the scheme of warfare as submitted to the consideration of the people of this country by Mr. Napier. But, supposing the Government did not think it advisable to avail themselves of the opinions of the gentleman who was described as " Fighting Mac," a Commandant had been recently appointed by the Govern- ment-General Babington-who might very properly be asked to supply the Government with his opinions on the scheme laid down by Mr. Napier in the New Zealand Times. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the honourable member referred to a distinguished general who had arrived in the colony that day. Mr. FISHER .- That is not answering my  question. It is the Review of Reviews over again. Mr. SEDDON said the honourable member had stated that it had been suggested to him that probably this matter might be referred to General Sir Hector Macdonald. He felt satisfied, if time would permit, that from the message which he would read to the House there was a possibility that they might have the services of this distinguished soldier. The communication was as follows :- " Your kind wire has given me great pleasure, and I thank you very warmly for the hearty welcome of the Government and people of New Zealand, which I fully appreciate and shall ever " MACDONALD." treasure. He thought, after what had been stated by the member for Wellington City, that Sir Hector Macdonald would come to the con- . clusion that he was not long in the colony before they found him something to do, which would be, he (Mr. Seddon) thought, an agree- able change-that was, from what he gathered as to the dining and feasting which Sir Hector Macdonald was to be given, and it was possible that an inquiry of this kind might be an agreeable change to him. When he saw this question on the Order Paper it struck him that what had ofttimes been said and written was not correct. He had come to the conclusion that there was something in a name, for the name of Napier was closely identified with Mr. Fisher honourable member was wrong in asking the Government to refer this matter to a military expert. They had what was known as the highest military authority of the Empire, known as the Defence Committee, at Home. If the honourable member had asked the question whether the Government were pre- pared to submit this matter to that Defence Committee, there would have been something in his question ; but he did not think it would be right to do what was asked, con- sidering the jealousy which he knew existed between certain members of the House and military experts outside -- that was, gauged by the writings he had seen on this matter. He thought, therefore, if this matter was to be referred to any one at all it must be referred to some authority with a greater knowledge than was possessed in the colony. Mr. FISHER said he had simply now to announce to the House, in consequence of what the Premier had said, that he would submit an amended question to the consideration of the House. EXPORT DUTY ON BALK TIMBER. Mr. NAPIER (Auckland City) asked the Colonial Treasurer, If, in view of the penal duties imposed upon New Zealand products by the Commonwealth tariff, he will submit to the House, at an early date, a proposal to impose an export duty on balk timber, so as to pre- serve to this colony the means of affording employment to an increased number of timber workers ? This was a question of great im- portance. It had agitated the minds of the timber merchants of the colony especially, and also of a large proportion of the working-classes. The proposal to impose an export duty on balk timber was not a new one. It was proposed in the House many years ago by a former Minister. The kauri forests in the North were being \--- rapidly felled and the timber exported, and the minimum amount of labour was employed. He thought the time had arrived-even if no fiscal hostility to New Zealand had been shown by the Commonwealth-for placing an export duty on timber sent out in logs and large flitches. He hoped the Government had con. sidered the matter, and that they would submit a proposal to the House at an carly date. Mr. SEDDON (Colonial Treasurer) said the Government had invited a conference of those engaged in the timber trade and those con- nected with timber, and that Conference would meet on Thursday next. No action would be taken by the Government pending the result of that Conference. He might say that the Go- vernment had been extremely well pleased at the manner in which the sawmill-owners and those engaged in the timber industry had responded to the invitation, and he believed they would have the best representative gathering of those connected with the timber trade that had ever been held in the colony. He thought it would be discourteous to them if the Government did not wait the result of the Conference. 
<page>593</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=633</url>
House could attend. Mr. SEDDON said, if members were appointed as delegates they could attend, but that would be for the Conference to say. He thought it would be well to keep politics out of the matter. He should say that the Conference would be open, but that would be for the Conference itself to decide. STEAMERS BETWEEN NEW ZEALAND AND SOUTH AFRICA. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) asked the Go- vernment, Whether, seeing that this colony is likely to be affected by the proposed Australian tariff, the Government will, with all possible despatch, arrange for a line of steamers to run between New Zealand and South Africa? He would like to ascertain from the Premier whether anything had been done in the matter, or whether the Government intended to do any- thing. He was of opinion that if it was necessary now to subsidise a line of steamers between New Zealand and South Africa, it was also necessary over twelve months ago, and he thought that these steamers should have been running now. The matter seemed to be unduly delayed, and he felt sure that the country was anxious to know whether the Government in. tended to do anything in the matter or not. If this matter was further delayed, some other country would obtain the whole of the African trade. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said it was the in-  tention of the Government to submit proposals to the House in respect to establishing a line of steamers between New Zealand and South Africa. Mr. FLATMAN .- It ought to have been done long ago. Mr. SEDDON said they had at the pre- sent time a line of steamers running every six weeks, but the conditions and circum- stances were such that there was no certainty, and the freights were so high that they did not prove a success. The Government thought it was necessary that something should be done, and proposals would be made, and he thought they would be adopted; and he be- lieved they would be in the best interests of the producers. He thought the colony might go as far as $30,000 a year, which was rather a heavy subsidy, but still he thought it was worth it. Germany subsidised her steamers with the view of promoting her trade ; France was doing so, and America prac- tically was doing so. We would, of course, be handicapped until we resumed our normal condition and got other markets for our pro- ducts ; and we must bestir ourselves, and the Government would submit proposals to the House later on, and he hoped those proposals would be carried. In the meantime the Government were ascertaining what could be done. His own view of the matter was this : They must not go in for speed, or passengers. They wanted vessels of the tramp class, which would carry large weights on a small coal- consumption. Time was not essential. He stores at the Cape, or else they would want a hulk there, so that they could place their meat and produce upon it, pending the disposal of the produce and sending it away into the in- All these matters had engaged the terior. attention of the Government, and they had complete proposals to submit to Parliament. INDUSTRIAL CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT. Mr. WILLIS (Wanganui) asked the Premier, Whether he will explain why he stated in his speech on Labour Day, as reported in the New Zealand Times of the 10th October, "that the amendments in the Conciliation and Arbitra- tion Act, as made by this House, would destroy the principle of the Act by 'wiping' out con- ciliation," when clause 6 of the new Bill enacts, "Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore con- tained, it is hereby declared that in any part of the colony, whether included in a district or not, and whether a Board of Conciliation has been duly constituted or not, a special Board of Conciliation shall, on the application of either party to the dispute, and in the prescribed manner, be constituted from time to time to meet any case of industrial dispute"; and, fur- ther, that in case of non-agreement the dis- pute can be referred to the Arbitration Court by either party? He would like the Premier to give an explanation of the statement he made when he addressed the labour unions on Labour Day in Wellington to the effect that the changes that were made by the House in the Bill were for the purpose of doing away with conciliation, while, as a matter of fact, the only object was to change the Board of Conciliation as at present constituted to a Board of Conciliation that would consist of the employers and the unions. There was no in- tention whatever of doing away with the sys- tem of conciliation and arbitration. The Pre- mier stated, "The change would destroy the principle of the Act, which was that there should be conciliation." " The change he referred to would wipe out conciliation." "He was a plain, blunt man, and said what he knew to be truth. They must stand by the principle of conciliation." He (Mr. Willis) said that the object of those who brought in the amendment of the Act was to make changes which would be in the interests of arbitration. The Pre- mier's remarks conveyed the idea that those who made these changes were the enemies of the Act, and that it was their desire that the principle of arbitration should be done away with, when, as a matter of fact, it was only done in the interests of that particular prin- ciple, because it was hoped that under the new system it would work better in the future than it had worked in the past, and give more satis- faction both to employers and workers. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the honourable member for Wanganui was not generous in the manner in which he had placed this question on the Order Paper. The honourable member desired to shirk a responsibility and to cast it upon the member for Palmerston. The amend- 
<page>594</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=634</url>
ment made in section 6 of the Bill was made on a motion of the member for Palmerston ; but what about the amendment made on the motion of the member for Wanganui in sec- tion 21? It was a new clause, which read as follows :- "Either party to an industrial dispute which has been referred to a Board of Conciliation may file with the Clerk an application in writing requiring the dispute to be referred to the Court of Arbitration, and that Court shall have jurisdiction to settle and determine such dispute in the same manner as if such dispute had been referred to the Court under the pro- visions of section fifty-eight of the principal Act." He feared in this case the honourable member had had an amendment placed in his hand. That was the amendment he had just read. It came as the voice of Jacob, but it was the hand of Esau. There was no doubt it was as effectual in sweeping away Conciliation Boards as though that were stated in so many words, because either party to a dispute, if this were carried, could go to the Ar- bitration Court. He preferred, himself, to have a straight-out issue rather than to have the Con- ciliation Boards done away with as this clause proposed. Section 6, to which the honourable member's question referred, provided that ex- perts must come in, but they sat as a Concilia- tion Board. It did away with the present Con- ciliation Boards dealing with every case. The present law was that both parties could call in experts. The alteration made by the member for Palmerston was that either party could decide to have it tried ; the Conciliation Board to consist of experts, with the President. That was not an unreasonable alteration ; but, as to the honourable member's amendment, he was pleased to find the honourable gentleman had repented before it was too late. He was glad the honourable member had brought the matter forward now, so that atten- tion might be called to it. The honour- able member now, at least, understood the position ; and it was to be hoped, when a fur- ther opportunity was given, as it most likely would be, to review the matter, the honour- able member would be the one to move the repeal of this particular clause. # . COMMONWEALTH TARIFF. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) asked the Premier, Whether the Government will, at an early date, state what steps they propose to take to meet the altered position of our small farmers as resulting from the Commonwealth tariff ? He did not know what course the (Government proposed to take in this matter, but he hoped the Premier would give some idea of what course he might be disposed to take, as, if a statement were made on the question, it would be gratefully accepted by the country. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) was not in a position at that moment to give a definite reply to the question. He had been asked that day whether the Government would take the opinions of farmers and others interested in this ques- Mr. Seddon tion, and he had answered in the affirmative; and if he now stated that the Government intended to bring down proposals or otherwise he would be stultifying himself. He would therefore ask the honourable member to await further developments. WAIMATE HIGH SCHOOL CADET CORPS. Major STEWARD (Waitaki) asked the Minister of Defence, Whether the services of the Waimate District High School Cadet Corps have been accepted ; and, if so, as from what date ? There appeared to him to exist an extraordinary state of things in connection with this matter. Seeing that the policy of the Defence Minister, of the House, and of the country was to encourage Volunteering and the training of cadets, it seemed a remarkable thing that a cadet corps formed by this High School eighteen months ago had not yet been accepted. A year ago he (Major Steward) asked in the House for the reason of the delay, and the reply was that the application had been sent to the Defence Department, when it should have been sent to the Education Department. Well, a fresh application was sent to the Edu- cation Department, and, though the promoters of this corps had thus been sent about from pillar to post, up to the time he had placed this question on the Order Paper a fortnight ago no definite reply had been received. Surely eighteen months was too long a time to elapse between the making of an application and the sending of a reply thereto. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the difficulty had not arisen in respect to this par-  ticular corps. The matter at issue had been whether these school cadet corps should be under the Defence Department or under the Education Department, and it had now been decided that they were to be under the Educa- tion Department. That being the case, the various corps which had offered would, he hoped. in a very short time be accepted and notified, and would be able to proceed with their duties. DRILLSHED AT FAIRLIE FOR MAC- KENZIE MOUNTED RIFLES. Major STEWARD (Waitaki) asked the Minis- ter of Defence, Whether he has received any recommendation from Lieut .- Colonel Bailey, commanding the South Canterbury District. with reference to providing a drillshed at Fairlie for the Mackenzie Mounted Rifles, and what assistance the Government will be prepared to give towards the cost of the same ? Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the Commandant of the Forces reported that no action could be taken in the matter pending the receipt of a report which had been called for from the Officer Commanding the district. Major STEWARD said his question was. Whether any recommendation had been re- ceived from Colonel Bailey. This matter had been pending for a good many months, and surely the Colonel could be ordered to send a reply at once. Mr. SEDDON said the Officer Commanding the district had been asked to report, and until 
<page>595</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=635</url>
receipt of that report. PERMANENT MILITIA UNIFORMS. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) 4.30. asked the Government, Whether they will favourably consider the question of supply- ing the men of the Permanent Militia with uniforms free of cost, as is done in the case of the police ? He merely wished to say that he was a plain, blunt man much given to speaking the truth, and he hoped he was not going too far in saying that what was sauce for the goose ought to be sauce for the gander. If the honourable gentleman could see his way to supply the police, who were a much more numerous body, with uniforms free of cost, he ought to be able to see his way to do so for the men of the Permanent Militia. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the Police Department only supplied the following made-up clothing: One waterproof coat and one greatcoat every two years. They also sup- plied a shako, and materials for making a jumper and a pair of trousers every year. The cost of making up was defrayed by the men themselves. The cost per man in the Per- manent Militia of uniform made up, including boots, for a complete issue was £11 17s. An annual issue of frock, trousers, boots, work- ing-suit, field-service cap, and forage-cap cost about £4 3s. per annum made up. The annual cost of above, supplying materials for frock and trousers, and supplying other stores as above made up would be about #2 per annum per man. A greatcoat and full-dress tunic would cost about $5 4s. every three years-say, annual cost, $500; triennial, £1,240. After the attack made on the defence expenditure in Committee on the estimates the other day he did not feel inclined to further increase the defence expen- diture at present. # LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL APPOINT- MENTS. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) asked the Premier, If in recommending future appointments to the Legislative Council he will give effect to the demand made some time ago by the Welling- ton Trades and Labour Council: that "the Trades and Labour Councils claim the right to be consulted in regard to the appointment of members to the Legislative Council "; and whether he is not now of opinion, con- sidering its numbers and importance, that the Farmers' Union is equally entitled to be considered ? He thought this question did seem necessary, as other interests and industries had representatives in the Upper Chamber, and he did not think the agricul- tural interests of the country had been pro- vided with any representation in the Council. He would also like to remind the Premier of a very attractive expression he made use of the other day, which was that small farmers should have representation in the Council. It was not that he desired that the farmers should assume any inequitable power in the Council, tural representatives appointed to the Council, who would be capable men, to afford informa- tion on matters relating to land and produce, they having been suggested for appointment by a large interest, such as the agricultural community. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) knew the honourable gentleman would do him the justice to admit that, so far as the farmers were concerned, he was the best Premier this colony had ever had. Mr. HERRIES .- That is very debatable. Mr. SEDDON said it was not at all debat- able ; it was a fact, and the farmers knew it too. What was more than that, they were on most friendly terms, and it would not be his fault if they did not continue. He considered that those who were the friends of the farmers were the friends of the colony, because every- thing came from the soil, and if the farmers were prosperous, then the whole country pro- spered. He might say, however, that the Go- vernment did not recognise that any organized body or bodies should be consulted in respect to appointments to the Council. An Hon. MEMBER .- It has been done. Mr. SEDDON said, At all events, the Govern- ment had never consulted the Trades and Labour Council as to who should be called to the Legislative Council. Whether that body had laid claim to this course having been followed was their business, and not his. They might have made recommendations, but he could not say that they had. With respect to the Farmers' Union, he would ask the honourable gentleman, if here, to renew the question after the next election. # ORDER OF BUSINESS. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) asked the Premier, Whether he will clear the Order Paper of all Bills not intended to be dealt with this session ? He would simply point out that a number of Bills had already been cleared off the Order Paper since he had given notice of this question. His chief reason for asking the question was that, as so many Bills remained on the Order Paper, members were put to the trouble of looking up numbers of Bills, some of which might not be dealt with during the ses- sion, and their attention to that extent was di- verted from matters that they would have to deal with. Further than that, one was frequently receiving communications from constituents asking whether certain Bills were to be dealt with this session or not, and he had had a num- ber of communications in reference to such Bills as the Teachers' Salaries Bill, the Railway Ser- vants Classification Bill, and the Licensing Bill ; and one naturally would like to know, as the session was drawing to a close, what Bills the Government would endeavour to pass before the close of the session. It was not with the idea of getting the Order Paper cleared, or of shortening the session, that he asked this question, but for the reasons he had given. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said he thought the Bills now on the Order Paper were Bills which 
<page>596</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=636</url>
pass this session. He did say that, though the House had been sitting for a long time, they had not done nearly enough, nor had they done what he thought the country demanded; and he thought it was the duty of the House-in fact, it was no sacrifice on their part-to do their work, and he thought members ought to go on until they had done their work, and then they could go back to the country and say the work of the country had been performed. That was the view he took, and he hoped members would go on doing the very good work that had been done during the last few days ; and, if members did, he thought they would be able to clear the Order Paper. He would do his best. He had some more Bills to introduce yet, and there were some very important measures now on the Order Paper. # RETURNS. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked the Govern- ment, When they intend to lay before the House the following returns, ordered on the motion of the member for Franklin : 10th July, three returns ; 16th July, one return ; 31st July, one return ; 14th August, two returns ; 18th Sep- tember, one return; and 4th October, one re- turn ? He asked this question because, as the Premier knew, it was most important that returns should be furnished during the session in which they were ordered. But in this case some returns referred to had been ordered the second week of the session, and, though the session was rapidly coming to an end, they had not yet made their appearance. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) could only say that effect would be given to the order of the House in each case. Mr. MASSEY .- When ? Mr. SEDDON .- As soon as possible.   LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL APPOINT- MENTS. Mr. BOLLARD (Eden) asked the Premier, If, when making appointments to represent the farmers in the Legislative Council, he will give an opportunity to the Agricultural and Pastoral Associations throughout the colony to nominate qualified persons in the same manner as Trades and Labour Councils nominate labour represen- tatives ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said he was sorry there was this difference between the member for Waitemata and the member for Eden ; probably it was a case of great minds moving in the same groove. This question also asked the Government to nominate farmers for ap- pointment to the Legislative Council. Con- sidering that he had given this question an answer in the affirmative a month ago, he did not know why it was now on the Order Paper. However, the honourable member was prac- tically justified in asking again for the views of the Government. He (Mr. Seddon) had said that the Trades and Labour Council did not nominate labour representatives, and they never had ; but for many years prior to the Liberal party coming into power in 1891, labour Mr. Seddon cil. They had rectified the injustice, however, and called labour representatives to the Coun- cil. Those who had represented labour in the Council since that time had really done credit to themselves and honour to the labour cause. With respect to agriculture and the farmers, he thought the pastoralists were very well re- presented, and, in fact, were over-represented in the Legislative Council. What really was short in the Council at the present time was a representation of the small-farming class. Those were the class of men they wanted in the Council, and that class of men would, when the opportunity offered, be nominated to the Council. CHATHAM ISLANDS. Mr. PARATA (Southern Maori District) asked the Native Minister, Whether the scope of "The Maori Councils Act, 1900," will be ex- tended so as to include the Chatham Islands within the operation of its provisions? His reason for asking this question was that he had received a communication from the Maori residents of Wharekauri, the principal island of the Chatham Group, asking that the pro- visions of "The Maori Councils Act, 1900," might be extended so far as to bring their islands under its operation. He was informed that a petition to that effect had been pre- sented to the House by the Native residents of the Chatham Islands ; and he hoped to see -in fact, he would see after the close of this session-the Maori Councils Act of 1900 brought into operation throughout the South Island Maori District which he represented. He was under a misapprehension last night in attempt- ing to obstruct another Bill which he then thought was the matter referred to in this question. But he had found out since that he was mistaken. This question referred to the Maori Councils Act, and had nothing to do with the Counties Bill, which he understood last night to bear on this question. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said the Government would consider the application that had been made by the Native residents of the Chatham Islands for the Maori Councils Act of 1900 to be put into force there. He thought, himself, it was a very good thing to have the Act brought into force on those islands. It was just what the Maoris there required. All the purposes and objects of that legislation would have there a fair field for operation, and would, he was sure, be to the advantage and benefit of the Natives. He was glad also, to judge by the remarks of the honourable member, that the Maoris of the South Island would make efforts to avail them- selves of the Act, and that they would apply for districts to be defined and gazetted in the South Island in which the operation of it would be invoked. He thought it was a very good Act, and the Maoris in the North Island who had already availed themselves of it were doing a great deal of good thereunder, from a sanitary point of view especially. And not only that, but it empowered them, under regulations, to 
<page>597</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=637</url>
was known as the drinking practices of the Natives in and around their settlements. That, he thought, was a very good thing. ALLEGED EXCESSIVE DRINKING OF TARANAKI MAORIS. Mr. KAIHAU (Western Maori District) asked the Native Minister, Whether the Government has had its attention drawn to the various re- ports in the Press as to the excessive drinking alleged to be carried on amongst the Maori in- habitants of the Taranaki District, and whether the Government will appoint a Royal Com- mission during the coming recess to inquire into the truth or otherwise of the said reports ? He was informed that it was intended to give wide publicity to the alleged misbehaviour of the Maoris of the Taranaki District. It was alleged they were drinking to excess. His per- sonal opinion was that these reports were very very largely exaggerated, because he had himself a considerable knowledge of the district. He was all over it last year, and he even went to the principal Maori village in the district, Parihaka ; and at all the meetings which he attended he never once saw a Native under the influence of liquor, nor did he see the Natives drinking any intoxicating liquor what- ever at these meetings. As a matter of fact, those in charge of the Parihaka meet- ing refused to permit any intoxicating liquor within the boundaries of the pa. He looked upon the outcry that was recently raised, and the allegations which had been made,  as being the immediate work of the reli- gious bodies throughout New Zealand. He knew there was a great deal of rivalry amongst the various forms of religious belief in this #cc-zero country : that every Church would tell you that it was the only right one ; and it struck him they were trying to make a great deal of capital out of this matter for their own pur- poses at the expense of the Maoris. He had therefore considered it necessary to ask this question, and he would urge the Minister to hold an inquiry forthwith into these accusa- tions that had been brought against a section of his constituents ; and he would further add that if the Minister found, upon inquiry, that there were any such practices indulged in as alleged in any of the outlying districts through- out his electorate, then certainly it behoved him to take some immediate step to put a stop to it. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) quite agreed with the remark of the honourable gentleman that certain sections of the com- munity, having at heart, no doubt, the cause to which they were so much attached, and a wish that that cause should be advanced as far as possible in the direction they wished-no matter at whose expense-were rather inclined to give credence to reports as to the moral con- dition of the Native people, which, possibly, might be more exaggerated than the facts would admit, so long as they got some shock- ing example to hold up to the public gaze. Their zeal in their cause seemed to him to lead did not compensate them for their trouble. He was glad to say that the report, whatever truth there might be in it, referred only to one part of the island. Generally speaking-and he knew it to be a fact-the Natives through- out the colony compared favourably with their European brethren as a temperate and sober people. As regards this particular matter which, according to those who reported on it, had taken place in the West Coast district, he believed there were grounds for the state. ments that had been made. He might say that some time ago he was interviewed by the Rev. Mr. Hammond and one or two others, who gave evidence of having personally wit- nessed a condition of things there which could only be described as highly improper and un- desirable, and that the Natives in some of the villages were given to over-indulgence, especially at their meetings and tangis. He had made inquiries apart from these gentlemen, and he found that it was so to an unusual extent. He did not think, however, that in all cases it arose out of any innate love for strong drink, but more through a spirit of "cussedness " which seemed to control them. They were under the ruling influence of Te Whiti and Tohu, and those gentlemen were not in sym- pathy with any law passed by the Legislature ; and because Parliament last year passed the Maori Councils Act, which had for its purpose the suppression of drinking in the Maori vil- lages, they had, in a spirit of bravado and de- fiance, indulged excessively in the use of alcohol, to show. Maori-like, that they cared not for the aims of that law. However, they were getting the by-laws published under that Act, which would be enforced in that district, to enable the Maori Council to prevent the bringing in of liquor to the Native settlements and the use of it at any Native meeting within such district. It might be necessary to pass a short Bill this session giving further powers to the Maori Councils, so that the Councils, at any time when satisfied that excessive drinking was being carried on by the Natives in any locality or settlement, might report the same to the Gover- nor with a view of that particular locality being made a Native district within the meaning of the licensing law of the country. That would prevent any one selling drink to any Native or Natives in those parts. With regard to prose- cuting inquiries in the matter, he would do so immediately the session was over. He would make it his duty-and it was his duty-to go to that part of the country and interview the Natives themselves and discuss this question with them. But he would like, before the ses- sion closed, to be armed by an amendment of the Maori Councils Act in order to give the power which he thought was necessary for carrying out the by-laws he already referred to, and, armed with that and with the desire to promote their wellbeing, and with the assist- ance he knew he should get from those who desired the best results in the administration of Native affairs, he was certain a better state of things could be made to prevail. 
<page>598</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=638</url>
Mr. MONK (Waitemata) asked the Native Minister, Whether the piece of land near the Pupuke Lake, Auckland, presented by the Go- vernment to the late Chief Patuone, is still the property of the Natives ; and, if so, what is its present disposition ? Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said that, after very searching inquiries, he found that the lands referred to in the question were Lots 29, 30, 31, and 32, Parish of Takapuna, contain- ing 110 acres 1 rood 20 perches, granted to Eruera Patuone by Crown grant dated 30th January, 1866. There had been numerous deal- ings with the land. So far as he could make out, 58 acres 3 roods 31 perches had been alienated outright, and 21 acres 3 roods were the subject of leases. This accounted for 84 acres 2 roods 31 perches, and presumably the balance was in the hands of the Natives. Mr. MONK asked if the land was not alien- able. Mr. CARROLL said it was not. RANGITOTO ISLAND. Mr. PARATA (Southern Maori) asked the Native Minister, Whether he will this session introduce legislation to give effect to the recommendation of the Native Affairs Com- mittee in the matter of the petition of Karepa te Whetu and six others, with regard to their claim for adjustment of their interests in Rangitoto (or D'Urville) Island, either by way of special Bill, or by inserting a clause in a Special Powers and Contracts Bill to meet the case ? The petitioners alleged that the reason why they did not bring the matter before the Native Land Court which sat at Porirua some time ago and dealt with this matter was that they arrived there a day late, and they found that the Court had, previous to their arrival, given an award affecting these in. terests, and had no power to entertain any application made by the petitioners subse- quent to the Court having given its decision. Then, the petitioners made application 5.0. under subsection (10) of section 14 of "The Native Land Act, 1894," but the Chief Judge of the Native Land Court ruled that that section did not apply in the direction in which the petitioner thought it did apply. When the matter was referred to Judge Mackay he made a report to the effect that the petitioners had a grievance, and he recommended that special legislation should be framed to meet the case. There was certainly a grievance under which the petitioner and his friends were now suffering, and he (Mr. Parata) would like to see it re- dressed with as little delay as possible. He therefore asked the question standing in his name. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said the Native Affairs Committee had dealt fully with this question and made a favourable recom- mendation. The report of the Committee had been considered by the Government, and there was no reason whatever, he thought, to disagree with their finding. It was a matter that would necessitate a clause being put into the " wash- able gentleman, therefore, should move in that direction when the measure was in Committee. TOROTOROA AND TAURUTU LAGOONS. Mr. PARATA (Southern Maori) asked the Government, Whether they will introduce this session legislation handing over the two lagoons named Torotoroa and Taurutu, in the Kaiapoi district, to the Maori residents of Kaiapoi ? These two lagoons were given to the Maoris residing at Kaiapoi in the year 1868. In Mr. Commissioner Kemp's purchase of the South Island there was a provision in the deed which specially referred to the lagoons-not to these two alone; but it was specially stipulated in the deed of sale, when the South Island lands were purchased, that the Maoris were to have assured and reserved to them their cultivations. workings, eel fisheries, and so forth. It was now found that the Europeans who were living in the neighbourhood of these lagoons claimed to be the owners of them. They claimed that the lagoons were part of the Crown purchase, and were now Crown property. To that he (Mr. Parata) said, No; they were specially exempted from the land purchased in the South Island under the deed of purchase by Mr. Commissioner Kemp. That being the position, the Government, in the interests of the Natives concerned, should move in the matter, and put the position of the lagoons on a proper footing once and for all, so that there would be no further doubt that they were the absolute property of the Maori residents, that they would continue to be their property, and that they would pass on to the descendants of the present owners for all time. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said the \---- Government did not intend to take any steps by way of legislation in connection with these two lagoons at the present time. The lagoons were reserved in 1883 for the use of the abo- riginal natives. There was nothing to show they were specially intended for the use of the Kaiapoi Natives alone. At the present time the two lagoons belonged virtually to the Natives : they were reserves. He might say that the Torotoroa Lagoon covered about 38 acres, and the Taurutu about 30 acres. In January last Taurutu was reserved for the pre- servation of Native water-fowl-ducks, and so on. It was tapu for that purpose. He had no doubt the pakeha interest had brought about that reservation. The Acclimatisation Society had no doubt moved in that direction, and it was a step that was for the public good. He thought the movers should, at any rate, have got the permission of the Natives. It was the least they could do to ask it. At any rate. the land had not been taken away, and it was quite right the Maoris should be jealous of the exer- cise of rights over what was theirs. However, Taurutu had been gazetted as a sanctuary for wild-fowl for the present, and no great harm had been done. He thought, however, the Natives would be only too glad to join in any movement that had for its object the preserva- tion of Native game. With regard to the Toro- 
<page>599</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=639</url>
toroa Lagoon, there was no question about it ; it was absolutely the property of the Maoris under their rights by deed and under the treaty of Waitangi. # DRUNKENNESS AT TAIHAPE. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) asked the Minister of Justice, If his attention had been drawn to the statements, as reported in the New Zealand Times of the 18th instant, of a man who was charged with drunkenness at Taihape, that "any man at Taihape could obtain drink as long as he had the money to pay for it," and added that "there was far more drunkenness in Taihape since the hotels were opened than formerly " ; and, if so, will he insist on more strict enforcement of the licensing law by the police ? Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) said a statement made by a party who was charged with drunkenness must be taken with a grain of salt, especially if that party was looking for an excuse for his drunkenness. So far as he (Mr. McGowan) was aware, there was no reason to believe that the police at Taihape were less active in their endeavours to prevent drunken- ness or to prevent the sale of spirits at illegal times than they were anywhere else. There was no law to prevent people from obtaining drink from a properly licensed house. Mr. ELL .- Not even though they be drunk ? Mr. McGOWAN said they were not allowed to obtain drink if they were drunk. It was a punishable offence for hotelkeepers to supply  drink to people who were drunk. That was the law, and there was no reason to suppose it was not carried out. It should be remembered that this was a statement made by a man charged with drunkenness, who would very   naturally look for some excuse for his own misconduct ; and, therefore, the statement should be received with considerable reserve. So long as a person was in a proper condi- tion, and asked for drink in a licensed house, there was no power to refuse to supply him ; but he had no information that would lead him to believe that men who were already drunk were allowed to go to these houses and obtain more liquor. The police made every endeavour to stop illicit traffic in drink, and to check its sale during irregular hours. The fact was that making matters of this sort public put those who broke the law on their guard, and made it more difficult for the police to obtain convic- tions. He was informed by the Commissioner that there was no reason for believing there was any greater neglect at this particular place than at other places. The police were making every effort to enforce the law, and the state- ment was such as ought to be received with considerable reserve. # STATE COAL-MINES. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) asked the Minister of Mines, If he will instruct the Royal Commissioners appointed to inquire into the purchase of a State coal-mine to visit Otago and investigate the coal areas there before send- ing in their report to the Governor ? He might say that there were very large coal areas in Otago, and a population of about a hundred and fifty thousand. If they were going to esta- blish State coal-mines, he thought they should establish one in Otago as well as upon the West Coast. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) might say, in reply to the honourable gentleman, that it was the intention of the Government, in the first instance, to deal with bituminous coal. The Commissioners were to report as to this class of mine ; but as soon as the Government Geologist was available he would have no objection to sending him to Otago to report generally. # STATE COAL-MINE. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked the Minister of Mines, Whether he will instruct the Com- missioners appointed to inquire into the pur- chase of a State coal-mine to visit the Auck- land Provincial District and report on the coal - bearing areas at Hunua and Wairoa South ? He did not think this question re- quired much explanation, because the Minister of Mines, being an Auckland man, would know there were large deposits of coal in the districts referred to ; and, though the locality might not be suitable for a State coal-mine, he thought it would be to the advantage of the Government and to residents to have an authoritative report thereon. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) might say that the reply given to the honourable member for Dunedin City (Mr. Millar) would meet this case. The coal in these two districts was somewhat similar in quality. But in the first instance the Government intended to deal with bituminous coal. Mr. MASSEY said he understood the reply was favourable. Mr. McGOWAN said, Yes ; they would get a report when the Geologist was available. # INSPECTOR OF PRISONS. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) asked the Minister of Justice, Whether he will instruct the Inspector of Prisons' to inspect and report on the penal settlement in the Island of Manuae, in the Cook Group? Now they had in their possession the Cook Islands he would like to know whether it was the Minister's in- tention to have an inspection of the penal settlement established there, under clauses 3 and 4 of the Act providing for the punishment of offenders of 1899, passed by the Parliament of the Cook Islands. Clause 3 says,- " And whereas by Act No. 3 of the session of 1892 it was provided that offenders against the laws of the Federation might be banished to the Island of Takutea : And whereas this Act has been inoperative by reason of the fact that Takutea is uninhabited and otherwise unsuit- able for the purpose of a penal settlement, Act No. 3 is hereby repealed." Clause 4 :- "The Island of Manuae is by this Act de- clared to be a penal settlement, and, with the consent of the owners thereof or their resident 
<page>600</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=640</url>
agent at Rarotonga, prisoners may be deported to that island, and may there serve a term of imprisonment with hard labour for any period not exceeding three years, under such regula- tions as to diet and hours of labour as may hereafter be made." They were aware that one prisoner had already been sent there lately, and others might have been sent previously, but of that they knew nothing. It was, however, surely desirable, as they had this penal settlement, that the Minister should provide for its periodi- cal inspection. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) said it was very satisfactory to see that the honour- able gentleman took such a lively interest in these outlying possessions. In reply to the question, he might say he did not intend to send the Inspector of Prisons to Manuae to report, because he considered the cost of doing so would be more than the report was worth ; but, if the honourable gentleman desired to visit these outlying islands, he would have great pleasure in appointing him a Visiting Justice, so that he might report on this ques- tion. # HUNUA COAL AREA. Mr. MASSEY (Franklyn) asked the Minister of Mines, Whether he will cause a report to be made on the quality and probable quantity of coal available at Hunua, in the Auckland Pro- vincial District, and the best way of getting it to market ? Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) said this applied to a different portion of the country to that previously referred to, and he had an extract from the report of the Government Geologist relating to it. The late Hon. Mr. Chamberlin, M.L.C., interested himself in this matter, and at his instance a geological report on the field was made by Mr. Mckay in 1888. This report, which is part of a parliamentary paper, concludes as follows :- "So far as my observations warrant me in expressing an opinion, these lead me to the be- lief that there is a considerable area of workable coal to the dip of the outcrops examined, and if transit over the range can be effected at a moderate cost the indications warrant the open- ing and working of mines for the supply of the Auckland market. It will also be seen that among the coals of the Lower Waikato and Drury Coalfields this coal takes the second place, being only excelled by that from the Waikato Company's mine at Taupiri." It would thus be seen that the Government was already in possession of information on the subject, and therefore there was no necessity for a further geological report on this part of the district. As to the other portion referred to, as soon as time permitted he would allow the Geologist to inspect and report. DRUNKENNESS AT POOLBURN. Mr. T. MACKENZIE asked the Minister of Justice. Whether his attention has been drawn to a letter in the Otago Witness of the 16th October, page 19, describing an alleged shock- Mr. Herries ing state of drunkenness and open sly-grog selling at Poolburn ; and, if the statements are true, why have the police not taken effectual steps to stop such orgies? Some time ago he had brought under the notice of the depart- ment the question of the prevalence of drunken- ness at this place, and understood that the police intended to take some action in the matter. A letter which appeared in the Witness seemed to call for some immediate action. He would read the letter :- Otago Central Railway Works, Poolburn. "SIR,-Perhaps the insertion of the follow- ing complaint in your widespread paper may assist to alter the deplorable and disgraceful state of things that just now may be seen any Sunday at the above works, casting a cloud of shame and horror over the lives and minds of the respectable workers employed there. As a traveller in Central Otago, my duties took me past and through that neighbourhood, and I was unfortunately detained there on a recent Sabbath day. Hardened as I am, and have been, with the sights and experiences of the world, I was positively appalled with what I was reluctantly compelled to see there as I was examining the works, and I hope never to behold such a sight again. Men and youths fighting, drinking, gambling, and screaming frightful oaths seems the order of the day, and Sunday, of all days, is the one chosen. If this sort of thing is to be re-enacted in Hades, I pity those who will be condemned to go there ultimately. I may add there are three sly- grog shops amongst them, doing a great illicit trade, but the police are baffled and powerless, as the law is against them. Surely decent, worthy, hard-working men can be found who would not abuse this privilege. This work is greatly delayed, I was informed, through the unfitness of fully one-half the present hands employed .- I am, &c., "TRAVELLER." He had had communications from some of the men working there, who deplored the state of affairs. He merely quoted it ; he did not vouch for the accuracy ; but he thought, with the communications he had received, it was justifiable that some action should be taken to prevent respectable men having their feelings shocked in this way. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) said the letter read by the honourable gentleman led one to infer that little or no action was taken in regard to this matter, while, as & matter of fact, they had had prosecutions for sly-grog selling at this place ; and he did not think there was any reason to believe that any- thing like the condition described existed. If it were so, and if the writer of the letter was aware of the facts, why, in the name of all that was reasonable and fair, did he not communi- cate with the police and aid them in getting a conviction ? Statements of this kind were frequently made by anonymous writers who were not prepared to support the police in case of prosecution. It was impossible for the police to devote the whole of their attention to one 
<page>601</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=641</url>
places, where works of this kind were going on, it frequently happened that for want of some legitimate form of amusement some of the men employed fell into evil habits on Sundays and other off-days. This was probably the result of the craving for excitement inherent in human nature. The police made every effort to put a stop to excessive drinking, but as the law stood at present it was often difficult for them to obtain convictions. # FREEHOLD. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) asked the Minister of Lands, Whether he will,-(1) Take immediate steps to stop any further sales of the freehold of Crown lands ; and (2) cease leasing any more Crown lands under the lease in perpe- tuity? In 1880 this country owned twenty million acres. Between 1880 and 1900 a large quantity of Native land was bought up. yet in 1900 the colony only owned fifteen million acres-that is, they had lost five million acres in twenty years besides what they had bought from the Maoris or private owners. In addi- tion to that, the colony had parted with a large quantity under lease in perpetuity, which was really worse than selling the freehold. Although nominally fifteen million acres of land was left, yet, as some eight million acres of that was barren mountain-tops and lakes, the colony, out of its area of sixty-six million acres, was really only left with seven million acres fit for use. In view of these facts, he thought it was high time to put our foot down and say that not another acre should be parted with under any condition, except the condition that there should be a periodical revaluation, say, once every twenty or thirty years.   Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) said, Before this could be done the law would have to be changed, and at this stage of the session he would have no hope of getting a Bill through. They had the honourable gentleman (Mr. Laurenson) the member for Lyttelton, and his friends on the one side against freehold or 999-years lease, and the honourable member for Waihemo and his country friends who would fight for the freehold. The House would have to settle this. He believed it would be a very tedious and rough business to settle this matter, and it would be well into the new year before a settlement would be arrived at. Besides, the law would have to be altered before anything could be done in the way the honourable mem- ber for Lyttelton wished. # NATIVE TIMBER. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) asked the Minister of Lands,-(1) To what extent, if any, the kauri, puriri, totara, and other native timber-trees are being planted in the planta- tions and forest reserves ? and (2), Will he have printed and circulated a leaflet showing how and what native timber trees can be planted, and the kind of soil and situation necessary to insure success ? This was a matter of very great importance. Experiments had been tried in the neighbourhood of Auckland, as reported Engineers, presided over by Mr. James Stewart, C.E. These facts were made known -the trees were in Mr. Hall's plantation : A kauri-tree planted in 1877 had reached a height of 36 ft., with a girth of 1 ft. 10 in. ; a kauri-tree planted in 1878-height, 34 ft .; girth, 1 ft. 11 in .; & puriri-tree planted in 1872-height, 39 ft .; a totara-tree planted in 1873 - height, 42 ft. This showed conclusively that these 5.30. valuable timber-trees could be success- fully planted and grown. Mr. DUNCAN (Minister for Agriculture) said there was no kauri, puriri, or totara grown from seed in the nurseries as yet. The report given by the honourable member wanted veri- fying to some extent, because he had been told by those who were acquainted with our New Zealand forests that the kauri-tree thrived only when it grew amongst large plantations of trees, and that it was very little use planting kauri-trees either singly or in small numbers. Those persons acquainted with the kauri could tell by the length of the trunk of the tree at what height the original forest was, that the kauri originally shot up through the surround- ing trees. When one heard of kauri-trees being several thousand years of age one could readily suppose that the kauri was of slow growth. He had heard persons say that they had seen kauri-trees growing for forty years close to their dwellings, and in that time they noticed very little growth in the tree. That showed that the kauri was a slow-growing tree. With regard to other trees, he believed there was no nicer tree that the puriri. As an ornamental tree or a valuable tree he did not think it could be beaten. . Mr. HERRIES said it would not grow where there were hard frosts. Mr. DUNCAN supposed that where there were very hard frosts it would not grow, and in that respect it was probably something like the kauri, and many other of the Australian trees. It was a very pretty tree. The following was the departmental reply to the question :- "No kauri, puriri, or totara have yet been grown from seed in the nurseries or planted out in the plantations. The other native timbers that have been grown are kowhai, broadleaf, black mapau, and white mapau. It was contemplated to establish a nursery near Kamo, north of Whangarei, but the necessary authority to secure the land from the Railway Department was not yet received. It was in that district that it was proposed to grow puriri, totara, and kauri, as it is far enough north to give them a chance of flourishing. It was also proposed to grow there some of the Australian eucalypts, such as jarrah, ironbark, sugar-gum, black-butt and the forest red-gum; but the Australian timbers are very liable to destruction by the gum-fly, and only a few species can be grown in New Zealand." PARIROA NATIVE RESERVE BILL. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said that 7.30. he stated on the previous day, with reference to a point of order raised as to whether 
<page>602</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=642</url>
would look into the matter and subsequently give his ruling. He had looked into the matter since then, and he was clearly of opinion that clause 3 of the Bill was an appropriation clause, and therefore must be brought down by Governor's message in the usual way. The Bill would therefore have to stand over until that message was brought down. # ORDER OF BUSINESS. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said he had been asked by the Premier to make an announcement with regard to the date when he would permit Bills to be read a second time, committed, re- ported, and read a third time on the same day. He found that it had been the practice, when the House was within a fortnight of the close of the session, for Mr. Speaker to permit this privilege to be given with respect to Bills before the House. He accordingly gave notice that on and after to-morrow- Captain RUSSELL .- A little longer, surely. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said, Of course, if there was a strong objection on the part of a section of the House he might give an extra day's notice, but he would make the announce- ment he had done unless there was any good reason to the contrary. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay) said, Before the House agreed to that which would compel them to sit all night at the discretion of the Premier, it seemed to him only right that the House ought to know what business they had to do. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said that he did  not rule that new business could be brought on after twelve o'clock, but that Bills which were on the Order Paper for second reading could be carried through all their stages at the one sitting. Mr. TANNER (Avon) asked if it was not usual to give more than twenty-four hours' notice of such an alteration in the procedure of the House. In former times the House had some days' notice. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER said there was no particular time laid down by Mr. Speaker. Sometimes it was a day, and sometimes two davs. Mr. TANNER .-- I am not objecting. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER would then an- nounce that on and after Wednesday, the 23rd October, Bills could be taken through all their stages at one sitting. It would be necessary for the Premier to move a motion to suspend the Standing Orders, if he wanted to call on new business after midnight. # PUBLIC-SCHOOL TEACHERS' SALARIES BILL. Mr. SEDDON (Premier). - Mr. Speaker, holding as I do that the school-teachers of our colony have a grave responsibility cast upon them, I consider it is in the best interests of the colony, and more especially of the rising genera- tion, that we should have the best teachers procurable. I must say that I have often won- dered, considering the salaries paid, how it was l is no system existing at all. From 1878 to Mr. Deputy-Speaker and which, I believe, are not surpassed in any part of the world. The fact that they should per- form their duties so efficiently, in spite of the adverse circumstances under which they have laboured, is all the more to their credit, and will commend itself, I am sure, to honourable members. 'To a great extent the teachers of the colony, so far as the men and women of the future are concerned, have a greater responsi- bility than the parents themselves. The founda- tion of our everyday life is laid in the schools; and if you have good teachers who carry with them the children that are under their care, and who by precept and example show the children the way they should go, and what is for their good, the impression then lasts through life. That being the case, it is all the more necessary, I think, that we should have the best possible teachers available ; and if we ask all this from them, then, in return, it is not too much for the State to pay them a living-wage. I say that in the past our school- teachers have not received that living-wage. They have not, out of the salaries paid to them, thrifty though they may have been, had an opportunity of making any provision for after-life. I, therefore, Sir, with pleasure rise to move the second reading of this Bill. By passing such a measure I feel that we are remedying the injustice of the past ; and, although what is now proposed may not be perfect, yet it is a step taken-it is the laying of a foundation upon which we can build. Members have said, " Postpone this until a further opportunity is given." Some of the teachers of the country districts are dissatisfied, and they have asked for post- ponement ; but we must have a commence- ment, and, in my opinion, the country is ripe for, and Parliament is prepared to give, a colonial scale of salaries to the teachers of New Zealand. Now, it is scarcely necessary for me, I think, to point out the anomalies that exist under existing conditions. We have at the present time thirteen Boards of Educa- tion, and a system of staffing under each of these Boards which differs most materially in each case. Members will see by reference to the evidence given before the Royal Com. 1 mission what I now allude to, and they will recognise how unfair it is under all these cir- cumstances that this state of things should continue to exist. The Parliament, which represents the people, is paying an equal capi- tation grant, but when members come to look at the manner in which these moneys are dis- tributed, they will find that under the altered conditions that distribution is not at all fair or equitable. I may say at this stage that it is through no fault of the Boards of Educa- tion, because each and every Board and the members of these Boards desire to do what is just and right. But the conditions existing in the different districts, and probably conditions that have prevailed from a long time back, have forced this system upon the Boards, and it has gone on from year to year until practically there 
<page>603</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=643</url>
variations in respect to grants that were made from time to time. In 1868, owing to the exigencies of the finances of the colony, material alteration was made in respect to the capitation grant, which was then paid upon the average attendance as against the strict average then brought into force. Well, a reduction was, I regret to say, made, and that to a great extent disorganized the staffing and caused the reduction of the teachers' salaries. The Boards did their best under the altered circumstances and with the reduced moneys at command. Later on, as members know, we increased temporarily the capitation grant, but it was on the condition that there should be proposals brought down to secure a colonial scale of salaries. Well, Sir, I have pointed out the necessity for that. In the Bill now before the House members will see that an honest endeavour has been made to meet this as far as we could. I may say that under this Bill the average salaries payable in every class and position, including women teachers, even under Scale 1, are raised generally to a standard which has never before been reached in the history of our colony. When I make that announcement it will, I think, to some extent disarm adverse criticism. Of course, exception has been taken by some of the female teachers in one or two of our dis- tricts; and there can be no doubt, so far as they are concerned-I refer to the first assistant, or head female teachers-that there will be a hardship in some cases, because it would appear that not only will other teachers not be able to reach the position that has pre- viously been occupied, but there will prac- tically be a reduction in their salaries. However, that cannot be helped in making a universal or colonial scale, and, in bringing these things from chaos into order, it means that some one, of course, must inevitably suffer. Whilst there are a few exceptional cases that suffer, and in respect to which there is an adverse alteration, still, taking them as a whole, I say that the condition of the female teachers is improved generally. And, what is more, the heartburning that has been existing amongst the teachers of one provincial district, as contrasted with the teachers in another provincial district, will be' at once and for ever removed if we place this mea- sure on the statute-book. I say that the reductions made in 1888 were made under conditions that were forced upon the Boards and the teachers, and I cannot blame the Government of the day, for the finances of the colony were in a very bad condition. At that time economies were essential, and one of the economies then made was the one I have mentioned; and I only bring that before the House in order to compare our position to-day with what it was when the reduction was made in 1888. Contrast the condition of our colony now in its prosperity with the position in 1888, and I say we can now afford to pay an increased capitation, and it will never be felt. I go further than that, servants-that is, those in the Civil Service -- we have years ago restored to them, and more than restored, the reductions made in 1888. And if we have with one branch of the public service restored the salaries that were reduced, all the more reason is there that now, whilst we have the opportunity and whilst the finances of the colony permit it, we should endeavour to go the length in that direction which the Bill proposes. Now, the parts of the colony that suffer most are where we have our scattered population : and members will pardon me when I say it is very hard indeed that the pioneers of our country -- those who go far away into the back blocks to carve out homes for them- selves and their families -- should be subject to conditions under which their children may suffer throughout their life : but that is the case. I say they suffer because they have not the educational opportunities that are given to those living in a more favoured locality. It is hard enough for parents to go back into the wilds of the bush to carve out homes for them- selves ; but to say that in so doing they shall for all time have a punishment inflicted upon their children seems to me harsh in the ex- treme. But that, unfortunately, has been the case. The Boards of Education have not had the means of giving fair salaries to those in the sparsely settled districts, and the result has been that the children of those parents educa- tionally have suffered. Instead of that being the case, where the parents have been doing the pioneering of the country we ought to give every facility and every encouragement, and, if possible, give greater facilities to their children than to those in the centres of population. I say that is a fair contention, and under this Bill, to a great extent, that has received atten- tion. There is a reaction on the children, but there is a still further injustice to the unfortu- nate teachers. Even in this there are anomalies which are difficult of explanation ; but the fact remains that if you take the report of this Com- mission, and the evidence and tables there given, you will see that the teachers away back who suffer great inconvenience are the poorest paid of the whole teaching staffs of the whole of our public schools ; and, if you starve the teacher, you at the same time starve mentally the pupils, because according to the salary paid so you have the class of teacher, and the result is disastrous to the pupil, and certainly is not encouraging to the teacher. The members of the Boards of Education, I knew, felt keenly everything I am now saying. They tried, as far as they could, to obviate this difficulty. They had to contend with the claims from the centres. and had to pay fair salaries in the larger schools, for if they did not do that they would not get good teachers ; and the result has been that the outlying districts have had to suffer. and the Boards have had to keep pace with the demands, and maintain the higher-paid and better staffs of teachers in the centres of population. That has been so, and ever will be so, as long as you have Boards as now constituted. But I say, and I claim it in respect to this Bill, that we are not 
<page>604</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=644</url>
interfering in the slightest with the Boards or the Boards' prerogative. As regards the staffing, administration, and control of appointments, everything is left to the Boards, except in respect to the salaries. I say here that the Boards will hail with delight the fact that Parliament has taken upon itself the responsibility, and now they will be able to say that the salaries are fixed by Act of Parliament. They will know where they are, and what they receive. On that ground alone, if for no other, I claim the support of honourable members, and I do not think that the members of Boards will object to the proposal. I stated a short time ago that there were anomalies, and I will proceed to show them. On page 4 you will find this : "In order to make this point clear we give the range of salaries at rates paid in 1899." This is quoted from the statement that forms part of Exhibit 2 :-- Average Attendance. Range of Salary. $70 to $115 20 .. 100 £160 . #225 . . 250 .€203 , 4275 $258 . $375 600 Now, when you find that in a school with only twenty pupils the salary is $70, and that in another school with the same number of pupils the salary is #115, you must say that either the one is considerably overpaid or the other is manifestly and unjustly underpaid. It is also a matter for surprise that in some of the educational districts there should be a difference of $123 in the salaries of the head- teachers of schools with six hundred pupils,  nevertheless, it is the fact. It is not the case that there is a great difference between the teachers, or that one is more perfect or more competent than the other. It is simply ac- counted for by the exigencies of the Boards. In one district they have large centres of population, few scattered districts, and con- sequently few small schools, and the result is they are able to pay a better salary than a dis- trict that has to a large extent a scattered population. I do not say that the teacher who receives $375 is receiving more than is fair, and more than a living - wage. I do not think they are. There, however, you can see the difference; and when such an astounding difference exists it is our duty, as far as we can, to remove the injustice, and I claim that this Bill does so. Now, naturally, 1 shall be expected to show what the effect of the Bill will be in the various districts. First of all, I think we may take it that the result arrived at has been arrived at after carefully collecting the evidence from those best able to give it : and I take this opportunity of saying I think the Commission has performed its duties in an excellent manner, and that they have placed the position before us in such a way that the House may with confidence follow the lead they have given us. The Commission had the assistance of those connected with Education Boards ; they also had the Inspectors, who were able to give material assistance as far as that branch of the service is concerned ; and they Mr. Seddon also had representatives of the teachers them- selves. Mr. J. G. SMITH .- Where were the female  teachers ? Mr. SEDDON .- Well, I think we may take it for granted that wherever you meet a Bri- tisher the gentle sex is well seen to, and that he is not selfish, and that he would not place her in an inferior position, even although it might profit himself. I take that for granted, and the report proves it, because, as I have said. there is only one education district in the colony where the salaries of the female teachers are materially interfered with, and there are only a few exceptional cases in that district. I think that may be taken for granted. However, that argument, which I anticipated would come up, I meet in this way : Admit- ting that there are some cases where 8.0. it seems unfair to the female teach- ers, still if you put this question to them. " Do you believe in a colonial scale of pay- ment ? " and they answer you in the affirma- tive; then I say it is much easier afterwards to do the same as we have had to do when the classification of branches of the public service has had to be dealt with-it is much easier later on to adjust matters once the foundation has been laid. I say, Pass the Bill, and, later on, when we come to work it, we shall find out where alterations are ne- cessary. For my own part, I have what I suppose may be called a weakness for the female teachers. I believe in the female teachers. As the Chairman of an Education Board and a member of the Board for many years, knowing the work that has been done by female teachers. even as head-teachers and as first assistants in some large schools, I can say I believe in them. I have known women teachers to be equal to the best male first assistants you can meet with. An Hon. MEMBER .- Why not give them equal pay for equal work ? Mr. SEDDON .- Well, of course, exceptions prove the rule, and those are exceptional cases. You do not get them every day ; and physically in many cases, they could not do the work. The cases in which they can do it are excep- tional. An Hon. MEMBER .- When they do it they should be paid for it. Mr. SEDDON .- I have said this is one of the points we should have a difference of opinion about. In the meantime, there is no reason why we should not lay the foundation and get the Bill through. Now, coming to \- the Bill, the total salary in the first scale, with allowances to the Board, correspond to a capitation of €4 on the total average attend- ance in all the schools of the colony. You know, of course, that we were asked to give a further increase. To that recommendation I informed the House -- as I also informed the country-the Government are prepared to give favourable consideration. Under the second scale the salaries and allowances to teachers would be equivalent to a capitation of #4 2s. 6d. on the total average attendance. Attached 1 
<page>605</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=645</url>
to the scale shown here are certain notes, giving the alternative to the staffing, and . corresponding with the alternative salaries. These alternatives, of course, are being freely used by the Boards. Under Scale No. 1 very few salaries will be reduced, and still fewer under Scale No. 2. Of course, in admitting as I have done that the amounts paid by way of salaries now in the colony are not too high, it is with some regret that I have to announce -- and I am sure the Commission must have felt it-that there should be any reduction at all, but it is necessary that should be done so as to give uniformity. It is proposed to con- serve the rights of the present holders of posi- tions in which the salaries are to suffer re- duction for a period of two years. I think, in making that arrangement, it will carry great weight with the House that we are giving time, and that members will admit it is reasonable. An Hon. MEMBER. - What is the financial result of that ? Mr. SEDDON .- As to the financial result, it will not make a material difference. The proposed staffing of the various schools will strengthen the position. I am satisfied of that fact, and the teachers themselves admit it. The Boards also say that what is proposed really strengthens the position, as far as the staffing is concerned, and I say it is a great gain to the children and to our education in general. I come then to the allowances to the Boards : " As regards the allowances to Boards, which are intended to meet the other expenditure out of their general funds (exclusive of building and other special expenditure) hitherto met out of the £3 15s. capitation, the total amount now proposed to be paid is in excess of the actual #cc-zero expenditure, taking the average of the last three years on the same items, by nearly £4,000, or, roughly speaking, £66,000, instead of #62,000 on the first scale." It costs £4,000 more-not a very serious item. "The allow- ances to Boards under the second scale exceed the present expenditure by £6,500, so that the Boards, besides having the salaries of their teachers paid to them on this uniform colonial scale, would be in a better position in regard to their other expenditure than they are at present." That is, they get £6,200 more ; and I do not think myself the Boards would object to that increase. Then, it is proposed, further, to make special provision as in the Third Sche. dule for the payment of house-allowances to head - teachers in all cases of schools above twenty where houses are not provided. On this point I may say that this had a great deal to do with causing dissatisfaction. Some of the wealthier education districts have man- aged to secure teachers' residences. They have used the money given by the colony to have residences erected ; but if you come to analyse the position, and take the amounts paid, and the number of residences, you will see the in- justice as compared with the poorer districts where there are no residences at all. So that the proposal we make now for the building of residences, or, in lieu of residences, an allow- ance for all schools above twenty, is going VOL. CXIX .- 40. a long way to remove difficulties. I have stated to the House, and members I am sure will not for a moment state that there is any ground for fear with respect to the con- clusion the conclusion has been arrived at not without careful deliberation. This is a matter that has engaged the attention of the Legislature, that has engaged the attention of the Minister of Education, and also of the Education Depart- ment for years past, and in what we now propose we are almost certain that the results, as I have mentioned, will eventuate. The decision was not arrived at hastily, and, therefore, it is not likely that we will pass the Bill and repent at leisure. My own opinion is that the evidence that has been given is of a reliable character, and that those who took that evidence were able to analyse it, and judge as to the sound- ness or otherwise of the evidence tendered, and which of the evidence should guide them in coming to their conclusion. I say it is almost impossible for members, with the limited time at our disposal and with the many things we have to do -- I say that very few mem- bers can really find time to go through the evi- dence and the Commission's report and satisfy themselves with respect to the question ; and they must take for granted a great deal of what is submitted. Although I, myself, have not been able todevote that time that I would have liked, still I am satisfied that what is here proposed is safe, and will certainly place our teachers in a position which I say the respon- sibility cast upon them demands, and I with confidence recommend the House to pass the Bill, and to pass it this session. I have been urged to postpone it, and have the Bill circu- lated and bring it up next session. My own opinion is that to do so would be a breach of faith, and it would be unwise. I think it would cause heartburning. Although the country is well prepared for the measure now, one cannot say what might occur next session ; and now that we have this measure fresh before us, and under the circumstances that I have mentioned, I say that we should be wanting in our duty if we were to leave our labours this session without placing this Bill on the statute-book. Well, I do not know that there is much more that I need say with reference to the Bill. Perhaps it would be better for me to await the criticism which may take place upon the measure. There are mem- bers in the House who were members of the Commission, and if the occasion arises they will probably give reasons for the soundness of the proposals of the Commission, and will be able to place matters before the House in such a way as to remove any doubt. I may say that we probably have not gone as far in the Bill before the House as probably some members of the Commission, or a majority of members of the Commission, would have wished ; but I say that we have gone as far as we can reasonably be expected to go. With very few exceptions, the Bill has given general satisfaction to the teachers ; and I may say that not a single Education Board- and that speaks volumes-has forwarded any 
<page>606</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=646</url>
itself should carry weight with members of the House. I might, in conclusion, simply say this, that the increases are as follows : Salaries of teachers, male and female, equal in both scales for schools of under 20 pupils, are in- creased by 11 per cent. ; schools of from 20 to 40 under Scale No. 1, salaries of male teachers increased by 6.7 per cent., female teachers by 22 per cent .; under Scale No. 2 salaries of male teachers are increased by nearly 10 per cent., and female teachers 25 per cent. That is the analysis of the increases made. I feel satisfied that this is a Bill of such a character, and having for its object such a good work, that it will be accepted with general satisfaction, and that the final result will be in the best interests of the education of our colony. I have much pleasure in moving the second reading. Mr. HOGG (Masterton) .- I was afraid, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill submitted to the House was about to pass its second reading without debate, and that is my reason for rising at this early stage. An Hon. MEMBER .- Are you going to oppose it ? Mr. HOGG .- No; and I hope there will not be any opposition. I do not intend to take up much time, because the Bill is of such a simple and beneficial character that it requires very little recommendation. I feel a certain sense of responsibility in commenting upon what I consider one of the most important measures that has been before the House and the country for a considerable period of time. We have had now in operation for twenty-four years an Education Act which, I think, honourable mem- bers will admit reflects the utmost credit upon the Legislature that passed it, and especially   upon those who were responsible for its creation. That Act has done an incalculable amount of good for New Zealand. It has improved the condition of the people, and its effects have been felt far and wide in the remotest corners of the country. But the question arises, seeing that this Act has done so much good and that it has worked on the whole so well, is any amendment required ? I must say that previous to enter- ing upon the work of the Commission to which I was appointed, I had very serious doubts as to whether the time had arrived when we should interfere with the administration of our Education Boards. I have had some experi- ence on one of those Boards-the Wellington District Board-and I may say my experience has been of a very gratifying character. We have enjoyed the advantages of a staff of very excellent and capable teachers, and the system of education seemed of such a character that I perceived very little reason at one time for any amendment. But my eyes were somewhat opened when I travelled over the colony and observed the different conditions under which schools are carried on in various districts. Under the Act of 1877 the colony was divided into thirteen education districts, and since then each district has been allowed to paddle its own canoe. The Boards have had a good opportu- nity of demonstrating what they could do in Mr. Seddon little or no fault to be found with their manage- ment. With the means provided by the State they have administered the Act fairly, in- telligently, and, on the whole, very success- fully. But the conditions of the education districts are very different. They are as dif- ferent from one another as are their climates- as variable, 1 may say, as the hues of the rainbow. We have seen, travelling from one district to another, that the staffs of the schools and the salaries of the teachers, being regulated by the question of finance, have been exceedingly variable. In one district we have found comparative affluence; in places like Otago, Canterbury, and even in Wellington here, there has been no difficulty in maintaining good strong staffs in the majority of the schools. But in other localities, such as Marlborough and Nelson and Westland, we have encountered, in singular contrast to that affluence, a state of poverty. This condition of affluence on the one hand and poverty on the other has been due to one simple cause-namely, the size of the schools. There are two classes of schools : a payable and unpayable class. Schools with less than fifty of an average attendance may be classified as unpayable, and in districts where these smaller schools prevail the Boards have an exceedingly difficult task to secure for their teachers anything like reasonable wages. On the other hand, in the stronger districts, with large towns and good centres-such as Dunedin, Christchurch, and Wellington -- where there are schools with from 500 to 700 of an average attendance, many of the schools are payable. and, unless the number of small schools be- comes excessive, the Boards are placed in 3 position to afford adequate staffs and to adequately pay their teachers. The large centres are consequently, under the capita- tion system, necessary to support the cut- lying districts. I need hardly contrast the good salaries paid to teachers in some of the schools of the cities, for instance, with the salaries paid in some of the schools on the west coast of the South Island. In the Marl- borough Sounds, for instance, you will find 3 unique class of small schools. In some cases one family constitutes the school, and the teacher is apparently a sort of mixture of domestic servant and tutor. These girls have never been adequately paid, and this is one of the difficulties we are compelled to meet. We are required to discover the means by which better payment can be afforded for small schools, which are becoming increasingly numerous on account of the spread of settlement. But, Sir, there is another thing that we have had placed before us : and it is that, in the large centres, where there are good strong staffs, there are also better facilities for education, because the teachers are well paid and the schools are well supported in every way. You will find, that in addition to the schools there, you have gym- nasiums, there are swimming-baths, there are training-schools, there are technical schools, and there are equipments not found in the country. 
<page>607</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=647</url>
Mr. HOGG. - The State pays chiefly for them. It comes very largely out of the pocket of the State. Every man and woman in this country has to contribute. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Nonsense. Mr. HOGG. - Honourable members may deny it as much as they like, but it is the fact. We have the evidence before us, and if you read the report of the Commission you will find what I am stating is correct. It is no use for members representing large centres saying that these things do not exist. Do they deny where the funds for these things come from ? I say the funds come from the State. An Hon. MEMBER .- NO. Mr. HOGG .- In some cases they are supple- mented by contributions from other sources. For instance, take the gymnasium in Dunedin. There they have a building erected partly by public contributions, but they received #1 for #1 from the State. Take the Technical School in this city : How much does it receive from the Education vote ? How much of the money that the State provides for primary education is expended in that direction? Surely honour- able members will admit that, being connected with the Wellington Education Board, I know something about this matter. It cannot be denied that the institutions referred to in the large centres have received a large share of as- sistance from the State; in some instances nearly the whole of the money comes out of the public funds. Members will find that the money expended upon these institutions is not derived entirely from public subscriptions. A considerable proportion belongs to funds set apart by the State for primary education. Well, Sir, in contrast with these well-equipped and well-endowed schools, if you go into the Marlborough District and travel just outside Blenheim you will find schools of a very dif- ferent character. You will find dilapidated buildings, miserable patched-up places, with dark rooms, and the children working there in semi-darkness -- buildings that are badly de. signed and badly constructed, with no play- grounds, where the teachers and the children as well are labouring under manifest disadvan- tages. And is it to be expected that in districts where the schools are starved, and the teachers are very poorly paid, strong teachers will remain ? What happens in the case of the strong teacher ? Is he not actuated-much as he may like his occupation, much as he may be attached to the families and the children-is he not actuated by the same considerations as influence the average clergyman, who, after working a considerable time amongst his flock, receives a call from a more wealthy parish, and determines to sever the ties of friendship which existed for years ? It is only in accord- ance with human nature. Teachers, like others, will drift into the wealthier districts, and try to improve their position. The result of all this is that the poor districts where the small schools are, and in which there are very one of the best experiences of my life has been few large ones, are impoverished as regards efficiency. Wherever there is a good, ener- his profession, he will aspire to better fields and improved opportunities. Take the case of a young man striving to improve himself. Directly he begins to see that he is making good headway and distinguishing himself by his suc- cess he will naturally seek a position in some district where he will have a good prospect of advancement. Well, Sir, I ask this : If there are such differences in teaching power between one district and another, and between the large centres and the country districts, is it fair or is it unfair to our young people ? I say it is unfair to a great many. They do not get the same opportunities ; they do not receive the quality of education that they have the right to receive under a system where every child is supposed to have equal privileges and equal opportunities. This is no fault of the Boards. The Boards have a difficult task. In the course of my travels I have found that the Boards as a whole have loyal officers and fairly good teachers. As regards the teachers, whether they are well paid or ill paid, I will say this : that they are uniformly actuated by one object-the progress and improvement of those in their charge. I need not refer to the importance of education as one of the chief factors in our national life. That cannot be denied. At one time I was under the impression that the establishment of any scale of staffs and salaries, fixing what was to be done by enact- ment, would constitute an invasion of the rights of the Boards, and would have the effect of depressing them. I would be very sorry to see any power taken away from the Boards. I do not want to see their functions impaired. That is one thing that should be guarded against. We want to strengthen the Boards of Educa- tion ; certainly not to weaken them. The question is: Will this measure in any way injure the Boards? I do not believe it will. It will take away from them a huge amount of responsibility, and remove a large amount of trouble. It will give them, in my opinion, a freer scope for useful administration than they have at the present time. I will submit a few figures that clearly indicate the difference be- tween one district and another. There are in Auckland 106 paying schools-that is, schools of fifty of average attendance and over-and 248 losing schools, or small schools. In Otago we have seventy-nine paying schools, and 143 small or losing schools ; in North Canterbury we have sixty-six paying schools, and 135 small schools ; in Wellington we have fifty-two paying schools, and ninety-five small schools ; and in Wanganui we have forty-eight paying schools and ninety-five small schools. Now contrast those figures with the condition of Marlborough, where there are eight paying schools and fifty-seven small schools on which the Board loses money. In Nelson there are twenty-three paying schools, and 101 losing schools; and in Westland there are five paying schools, and thirty-one losing schools. I will not take up much more of the time of the House. I wish simply to say that in travelling with the Commission and in- 
<page>608</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=648</url>
for having selected men of experience as mem- bers of the Commission. I know that honour- able members always appreciate important work when they find it well done. My col- leagues, I may say, were experts in their way. We had this House represented ; the inspec- torial staff and the teachers were also repre- sented ; and I believe the work done has been done thoroughly. The Bill now before the House is based on the report of the Commission, and the report is based on the evidence, occupy- ing 600 pages, obtained from the best authorities in the different education districts. If the Bill is passed, the teachers of New Zealand will realise a manifest advantage; the teaching pro- fession as a whole will be elevated; it will be made more attractive, and in course of time we will find the most competent men and women that New Zealand can produce engaged in what is undoubtedly the most important profession to be found in the colony. Mr. G. J. SMITH (Christchurch City) .- Sir, I do not intend to take up more than a few minutes, because I recognise that the House is anxious that the Bill should get into Committee. However, I should like to say a word or two with reference to the question. We have just had an instance of the utter futility of appoint- ing Royal Commissions. Here is the Chairman of the Commission on Teachers' Salaries telling members that the swimming-baths of Canter- bury were paid for out of the State funds, while, as a matter of fact, they were provided for by  private subscriptions, and for this information we pay £762 for printing the report. Mr. T. MACKENZIE. - That was given in evidence too. Mr. G. J. SMITH. - Well, evidently the honourable gentleman (Mr. Hogg) who has just spoken, having had his mind occupied as Chair- man, did not note that fact in the evidence. Sir, I would like to know what was the object of appointing this Royal Commission. I am not questioning the ability of the members of the Commission ; but we have an Education Department, we have officers in the de- partment, and if they are worthy of their position they ought to be able to give the Minister of Education sufficient information and guidance as to what the department ought to do in this matter. We have the report of the Commission, and the evidence printed. We have also in the First Schedule of the Bill a proposed colonial scale of payment to teachers. I want to know whether that scale was drawn up by the Commission or whether it was drawn up by the Under-Sec- retary of the department. If it was drawn up by the official head of the department, then, of what use were the members of the Commission so far as guiding the affairs of the department were concerned ? I repeat, I am not criticizing the ability of the members of the Commission, but simply pointing out the futility of appoint- ing a Commission to take evidence throughout the colony, and then to adopt a scale of salaries drawn up by the permanent head of the de- Mr. Hogg has adopted without understanding how it will work out. Then, in connection with the constitution of the Commission, I want to draw the attention of the House to this fact : We have a Commission appointed consisting of four members of the House, one of them belonging to the teaching profession. An Hon. MEMBER .- Who are they ? Mr. G. J. SMITH .- Messrs. Gilfedder, Hogg, Lethbridge, and T. Mackenzie. Then we have the Education Boards represented by Mr. Luke and Mr. Weston, and the Inspectors repre- sented by Mr. Henry Hill and Mr. John Smith, and the teachers represented by Mr. William Davidson and Mr. Ralph Duncan Stewart. An Hon. MEMBER. - Who represented the female teachers ? Mr. G. J. SMITH. - I was going to point out that on the whole Commission there is no repre- sentative of the lady teachers of the colony. If it was desired to do justice to the teaching pro- fession there ought to have been one or two ladies associated with it for the purpose of taking evidence. It is absurd, when we have so many lady teachers in the colony, that they should not be represented, and I cannot under- stand what the Government was about in nct seeing that the lady teachers of the colony were represented on the Commission. So far as the proposed scale is concerned, I am advised that the recommendations of the Commission are largely in the interests of the male teachers ; and it is all very well to say that the teachers of the colony are anxious that this Bill should be passed. A large proportion of them are anxious that it should pass ; but, on the other hand, members of the House are receiving quite a number of communications from teachers against it. Mr. FOWLDS .-- One or two from Canter- bury. Mr. G. J. SMITH .- The honourable member for Auckland City is quite wrong. They are coming from all over the colony ; and I say that there is a difference of opinion on the Bill, and with the proposed scale more particularly. The whole teaching profession is anxious that a colonial scale should be adopted, but they are also anxious that the scale, when adopted, shall be fair, just, and equitable in its opera- tion. In this connection I want to ask the House for a minute or two to consider this point. We have established in our Education Department a difference between the male and female teachers who are engaged in this work. We have appointed female teachers to certain positions, but the scale of pay to them for the work they do is very much less than is paid to the male teachers. I want to know why that Is not this the only department in the is so. State in which a distinction is made between male and female in the amount of remuneration paid for work done? If you find a female clerk in the Public Trust Office, or in any other office under the Government, you will find her paid for the work she does and for the position she occupies. I acknowledge at once that they 
<page>609</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=649</url>
main school and the side-school should be put are not appointed to the higher positions ; but they are given positions, and the salaries at- together, and the payment of salaries be ap- taching to them are, in many instances, very portioned ; but it does not say in what position fair ones. When, however, it comes to the the teachers are to rank. I have asked two or teaching profession we are told that the female three members of the Commission on this point, teachers of the colony are unable to stand the but so far I have not been able to get any infor- mation. I do not want to detain the House at strain put upon them in teaching children. That is the only argument we have heard, and any length, but the question of a colonial scale of salaries is one which has been engaging the it is an argument that is utterly worthless. attention of the members of the teaching pro- The female teachers do not admit it, and I want fession, and I believe they are anxious for it. to place one or two facts before the House in But, while that is so, in passing this Bill we this connection. I am told that the most diffi- must see that justice is done both to male and cult standard is the Fifth, and that the hardest female teachers, and equal pay given for equal work is done there ; and, accepting that as cor- work ; and, if it cannot be done in any other way, rect, I have obtained some particulars of the I trust the Committee will devise some means schools in the Canterbury districts, and the whereby female teachers will be paid for the work done there by the female teachers. I want specially to deal with the question work they do, and that the worth of their work whether female teachers can stand the strain will be recognised. or not. In one of the leading schools the first a few words on this measure, because I believe assistant mistress is at present teaching Stan- that those members who say the least will in dard IV. with eighty-four pupils. She has all probability be the best friends of the Bill. previously taught Standard VI. for five years ; Standard IV. for four years ; has been in the However, there are one or two matters which I cannot allow to pass without alluding to. In profession for eighteen years, and never had any the first place, my principal objection to the Bill other than ordinary term holidays. In another is the treatment which the aided-school teachers school the first assistant mistress is teaching receive. For years past the rule has been to Standard V., seventy-one pupils , has previously make a fixed grant per head to children attend- taught Standard V. for eight years ; Standards ing those schools. This only allows the teacher IV. and V. alternately for five years; has been twenty years in the profession, and never had to obtain in some cases a living-wage. It is true that in respect to some Boards-notably in any other than ordinary school holidays. In the South Island-grants of £5 per head have another school, first assistant mistress teach-  been made, the householders of the district ing Standard IV., seventy five pupils ; previous experience, Standards IV. and V., Standard V. making up the amount of the minimum salary to, say, £65 or £70, but no such limit is provided for three years continuously ; teaching nine here. It seems to me that this Bill does not years and a quarter, and only four days and a provide enough, at the rate of £5 per head for half leave of absence-one half day per year. I children attending aided schools, for we must mention these as instances of the work done by recognise that many of those schools have only female teachers in the position of first assistant an attendance of from eight to fourteen children. mistress, and could give five or six others. The The fact is that those aided schools will still be work done by the second assistant mistress is in an unsatisfactory position even if this Bill equally important and onerous, and yet in the should become law. For other schools a mini- face of these facts we are told that female mum is fixed, and the teacher is assured at teachers cannot stand the strain of the teaching least a living-wage. But in the case of aided- profession. Some of the most difficult work in the important schools of Canterbury is done school teachers the same state of things pre- by female teachers, who have stood the strain vails as in the past, and in many cases their lot is not an enviable one. In connection with for years, and who, in addition to the ordinary country schools I see that the Schedule only school - work, have had to teach domestic provides for pupil-teachers where the attendance economy and physical drill, and are also re- is ninety or more. This allows very few pupil- sponsible for the general behaviour of the girls. teachers being trained in country schools, and It is absurd for any member of the Commis- the result is that the teachers in country sion or of the House to say they cannot stand schools are almost invariably teachers ap- the strain ; they are able to do so, and get pointed from the city schools ; and the natural equally good results with the male teachers. result is that they are dissatisfied with their Some members say the lady teachers are in surroundings when they go into country dis- altogether a different position from the male tricts, and this to some extent militates against teachers-they marry and go out of the pro- their success. I should be pleased if some fession. But the male teachers do not stay provision were made providing for the train- in the profession if they see a chance of getting ing of pupil-teachers in the country schools, a better appointment in any other profession. which would benefit both teacher and children Then, there is another question -- and I hope materially, because teachers used to country some member of the Commision will deal with life would be more suited to country-school it-in regard to the question of side-schools work. The teachers have sound reason for where they teach up to the Third and the complaint with regard to their salaries. It is Fourth Standard, and which are practically now some thirteen years since any alteration in sole charge of a female teacher. The scale was made, and at that time the alteration was proposes that the average attendance of the Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) .- I only intend to say 
<page>610</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=650</url>
downwards, by reason of the bad times and depression in trade and agriculture. In every other position of life there is a struggle for higher salaries at present. The farmer desires higher prices for his produce, and the artisan a higher rate of wage, and, surely, it is only reasonable that school- teachers' services should be renumerated better when the colony is now enjoying fairly good times. The member for Christchurch City asked what was the object of the Commission. I take it that the object of the Commission was to provide an equitable scheme of salaries for the public-school teachers of the colony ; but, unfortunately, there was this feeling among the members of that Com- mission : that female teachers in charge of schools, or as assistants, should be paid at a lower rate than male teachers. The Premier said that teachers in the back blocks had suffered very much in the past. This Bill will not affect the teachers in the back blocks, or very little indeed ; and it is the back-blocks schools that are invariably the small aided schools. An Hon. MEMBER .- Will it include them ? Mr. BUDDO .- No, for in the district of the member for Franklin the salaries in some aided schools will be reduced. However, I presume we must put up with the inevitable ; but a minimum salary should have been fixed for these back-block teachers. This is one of the principal blots in the Bill. It is true there are one or two districts in the colony in which the householders provide a minimum salary. It is $65 in Canterbury, and, I believe, $70 in Otago ; but this Bill should have laid it down as a hard-and-fast rule that no certificated teacher should go into an aided school unless a mini- mum salary of from £60 to $70 is provided. This would be better than is provided now in many cases. Then, I think the Premier stated that the women could not do the work. I need not go fully into this question. I think the women teachers can do the work. In many cases the average of absence through sickness has been such as to show that the female teachers are nearly as regular in their at- tendance as the male teachers. This colonial scale, in my opinion, is worthy of the colony, and will encourage a profession that demands our best assistance. But, at the same time, there are two blots in it, and one of them is that the women teachers have this reflection cast upon them of being placed on a lower scale of pay than the male teachers when filling the posi- tion of assistant. Where the average school attendance is forty to fifty, the malo teacher receives a salary of $155 and a capitation for every extra scholar of $1, whereas the female teachers receive a salary of £145 and a capita- tion of only 10s. The same thing applies right through the scale ; and we find that where the boys and girls are taught apart the Schedule provides that where the attendance is from 201 to 250 the male teachers are to receive £185, while on the same attendance at the girls' school the female teacher is to have $135 per annum. Surely, Sir, this difference is not warranted ; and I believe the female teachers Mr. Buddo injustice is removed at an early date, and that they are paid for the work they do. Personally, I should like to see all reference to male and female assistant-teachers taken out of the Schedule. The Boards of Education are allowed to staff the schools, and I feel confi- dent they would continue to do so in a manner that would not result in the employment of more female teachers than males in large city schools, and if the salaries were adjusted, and the average salary paid to female and male teachers alike, the female teachers would feel that they were being placed in the position of being able to carn the salary if they were appointed to the positions. Such a system would cost the colony no more, and the reflection would have been removed from the Schedule recognising a difference between the work of male and female teachers. Sir, there are many old settlers in this colony who owe all the education they have got to the teaching in a dame's school in the Old Country, and I think those old settlers will resent this reflection being passed upon the female teachers of the colony, who have un- doubtedly done excellent work in our schools in past years. The Bill in other respects I think is a good one, and I intend to support it, for I recognise any alteration in the Schedule will in all probability lead to delay or loss of the measure. But, at the same time, I could not allow the opportunity to go past without pro- testing against one or two of the blots that spoil the Bill, and I trust in the near future that we shall be able to remove those anomalies from the schedule of teachers' salaries, so that the principle of equal pay for equal work may be at least recognised, if not practised, and that teachers of small or aided schools should be provided with a reasonable minimum salary. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) .- I suppose 9.0. it is almost presumption for a mem- ber who has not been on the Commission to speak on this Bill, especially after the speech of the Right Hon. the Premier. I do not know why he moved the second reading of the Bill at all. It is down in the name of the Minister for Public Works. Mr. SEDDON .-- He is busy with the Public Works Statement. Mr. J. ALLEN. - Are we to get it to-night ? Mr. SEDDON .- I think so. Mr. J. ALLEN .- We will excuse him, then. Well, Sir, I say that the argument which was adduced by the Right Hon. the Premier was a curious one in favour of our passing the Bill. What did he say? He said that members had not had any time to go through the evidence, and they must take for granted what has been submitted. Well, I should like to know whether it is the usual thing for the Pre- mier to ask the House to take what is sub- mitted to them, when they have evidence to read ? And I would like to know what is the value of printing all this evidence? I under- stood we were to be given time to go through this evidence, and judge for ourselves whether the report is in accordance with the evidence, and whether the Bill is in accordance with the re- 
<page>611</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=651</url>
is that we are to take the evidence as read, and take the Bill as submitted as being in accord- ance with that evidence. Now, Sir, I do not approve of this method of dealing with legisla- tion, and I think it would be very much better if the Premier would take the second reading of the Bill and then postpone it till next session. I do not mean to say he should not pay the extra capitation. Let him pay the extra capi- tation to the Boards this year, and let them deal with it this year as they think fit ; and I do not think it would be a very great hardship to the people interested if we continue the existing state of things with the extra capita- tion of 5s. Then, during the recess, we shall have time to go through the evidence, and early next session we could deal with the measure in a way which would do credit to us and to our legislation. Another curious argu- ment the Premier adduced was that, though the country is prepared for this measure now, it is hard to say what will be done next session. I can only put one interpretation on this statement, and it is that the country is in ignorance now, but when enlightened it will deal with the matter in a different way. If that is the correct interpretation, surely the proper thing to do is to delay the measure until next session, and let us see whether that interpretation is correct or not. Perhaps the country, when it has read the evidence, will be in favour of the Bill ; and this conclusion of the Premier's may be an incorrect one, and I dare say it is. Then, the Premier has said that not a single Education Board had objected to the measure. Well, I do not know whether other honourable members have had the communica- tions that I have had. I have had a circular from the Education Board of Otago objecting to the measure ; I have had a circular from Auckland, I think, objecting to the measure ; and I do not know but there have been circulars from Can- terbury and elsewhere also in opposition to the measure. Therefore the statement of the Pre- mier can hardly be correct ; and it leaves one doubtful whether the measure is in accordance with the wishes of the people or not. I do not say it is not in accordance with the wishes of the people, and I do not say the Bill is not a good Bill ; but I do say none of us have had time to consider it, none of us have had time to read the evidence, and we are acting entirely in the dark on this subject, as the Premier himself has admitted. Now, Sir, the Chairman of the Commission, from whom we expected some more enlightenment than we got this evening, has told us that no fault was to be found with the Boards of Education with the means at their disposal, and that he did not want to see their functions impaired. Sir, I am not at all sure but that the step we are taking in this Bill is the first step towards impairing the functions of the Boards. I have had very great faith, and still have very great faith, in the Boards of Education and in the School Com- mittees, as bringing the colony into the very closest touch with our educational system, right down to the very limits of colonial mittees are the strength and the strongest pillar of support that our educational system has; and I hope that this measure, if it passes into law, will not impair the efficiency of the Boards of Education. I fear, however, that it is only the first step towards something further that is to come hereafter, which will take away from the Boards of Education more power than this Bill does take away. An Hon. MEMBER .- And a proper thing too. Mr. J. ALLEN. - The honourable member says, " And a proper thing too." Well, I do not agree with him. I do not agree that the power of the Boards of Education should be im- paired in the slightest ; it should rather be strengthened. The Chairman of the Commis- sion said that this Bill took away from the Boards their responsibility. Well, if this takes away from the Boards their responsibility surely it impairs their efficiency. Responsibility, when properly acted upon, means efficiency, and if responsibility is taken away I say efficiency is bound to be impaired ; and the admission of the Chairman of the Commission, that this Bill does take away from their re- sponsibility, means nothing more nor less than that the Boards of Education in a very short time will be impaired, so far as their efficiency is concerned. If you take away some of their power, then it is only the first step to taking away more of their power. Now, the Chairman of the Commission also made this curious remark : that the conditions of the different districts are as variable as the hues of the rainbow. Well, Sir, if the condi- tions of the districts are so variable and change so much as the hues of the rainbow, why this alteration? Why this stereotyped plan ? If the conditions are different in the different districts, then they need different treatment. This tends to treat them all exactly alike on a stereotyped plan. I think that the argument he adduced was an argument not in favour of this Bill. Then, he also made allusion to the large centres of population, saying that the large centres had strong schools, and that that was unfair when compared with other districts where there were none of these large schools. Well, my experience is not a very wide one, I admit, but my experience of the large centres has been that a large portion of the profits made in the large centres have gone to sup- port the small schools in the country dis- tricts. That, at any rate, has been the case in Otago, and I shall refer later on to the effect of this Bill on the small schools in Otago. Now I come to the Bill itself, and I am as desirous as any one in the House-per- haps more so-that our school-teachers should be placed in as good a position as possible. I look to them to educate our youths in the colony, and I hope in the course of time that the effect of that education will be felt through- out the length and breadth of the land. The school-teacher, to me, is the most important man in the colony, for in his hands is placed the training of those who afterwards will be- come our citizens, and if he trains them well I 
<page>612</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=652</url>
ing, anything that will, so far as the colony can afford it, give him a better salary, and make his profession an attractive one to the best of our youths, will receive the warmest support I can give. At the same time I fear that this Bill does certain in- justices, which I desire to point out. With re- gard, first of all, to the second assistant teacher, I admit I have not gone through the evidence, and therefore I am only speaking from the in- formation that has been supplied to me, and that is an additional argument why I think the measure should be delayed till next year, so that we might inquire into the reports that come to us, and see how far they are true and how far they are not. However, what I am in- formed in regard to Otago-and I believe the same applies to Auckland-is that in nearly every case the second assistants have their salaries reduced. I know of one instance in which there is a reduction of $30, and in an- other of $40; and I believe in another there is a reduction of something like $50-from €180 to £130-and that is neither in Otago nor Auck- land, but in Hawke's Bay. Well, if that is the case with regard to second assistant teachers, there is, to my mind, something that needs in- quiring into in the Bill. But the case of second assistant teachers does not supply to me the strong argument that the small schools do, and, if I am informed aright, it is the small schools in certain districts that are about to suffer under this Bill.  Mr. T. MACKENZIE. - Where ? Mr. J. ALLEN .- In Otago. I admit can- didly I have not checked the information that has been supplied to me as I might have done. I have not had time, nor has any one had the time to check the information they have re- ceived. Mr. GILFEDDER .- Could you tell us how many schools with an average under fourteen will suffer ? Mr. J. ALLEN. - I will tell you as far as I have been informed. The Government pro- posal is to give €5 a head to schools with an attendance of under twenty pupils. They fix a minimum salary for all schools over twenty, but they do not fix a minimum salary for schools with under twenty. Mr. SEDDON .- We leave that to the Boards. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Well, it is all very well to leave it to the Boards ; but, if you are going to leave the small schools to the Boards, why do you not leave the large schools to the Boards as well. If you fix a minimum salary for a school with an attendance of thirty, why not do the same for schools with an attendance of fifteen ? Mr. GILFEDDER .- It is done-$75. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Yes, I will come to that. Now, there are in Otago fifty-four schools with an average attendance of under twenty, and of that number twenty-one of the teachers would have their salaries reduced to below $70. In Otago they have been paying ₺70 a year to the teachers of schools with under twenty pupils, and twenty-one of them would be reduced to Mr. J. Allen would be paid to the small country schools, some of them in the Otago District which have heretofore been receiving £70 a year. Then, my informant says,- "Of course, the border-line would change, and at any time a good few more schools might fall in attendance and come within the zone of this uncertain payment. He would not get anybody to undertake the position at such a salary with the risk of its falling to vanishing- point at any time. Such teachers would never know their income. Covering a recent period, for ten schools at £70, minimum, we had only one applicant ; for four at $70 we had no applicants whatever. You can imagine what the result would be if we advertised a variable salary from £50, that might fall to nothing, and not leave travelling home expenses." Well, that is a very serious matter if it is so - that these small schools, which were always a difficulty with the Education Boards, and which the Otago Education Board has in the past tried to cultivate, should receive a blow like this from a measure which is supposed to advance the educational prospects in New Zea- land. It is, to my mind, such a serious matter that it is sufficient for me to do what I can to delay the Bill to prove whether it is right or not. Mr. GILFEDDER .- It is only a question of money. Mr. J. ALLEN .- " A question of money !" But the question of money is the whole ques- tion. Mr. GILFEDDER. - We were limited to the £5. Mr. J. ALLEN .- I know that; but I say that, while you fix a minimum salary for schools of over twenty, you leave the schools of under twenty to rely on the £5 a head. Why not give the same advantage to the schools under twenty ? These are the schools that deserve the greatest encouragement. They are the schools that at present have no en- couragement - there are no big schools near them, they have no gymnasium, and they have not the attraction of the town. There- fore the schools have no means of keeping up the education unless they are provided for, and under this Bill I consider a serious blow is being aimed at these small schools, schools that are now being cultivated by the Education Boards ; and I hope no Bill like this will be allowed to go through the House without careful scrutiny. I do not intend to delay the House over this Bill, but I do think it is a matter of so much importance-especially in view of the particular facts brought to my notice-that the House should pause before it puts upon the statute- book a Bill which will have such serious effects as those I have indicated. I hope the Right Hon. the Premier, who introduced the Bill, will agree to pay the extra 5s. a head capitation for this year to the Education Boards, and let them administer it for this year, at any rate. Then, next year this Bill should be brought for- ward early in the session, when we shall have any  
<page>613</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=653</url>
let us all then unite-as I believe we all should -to put on the statute-book a measure which will place this question upon a better footing than it is at present. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) .- The Bill now before the House is an outgrowth of the Bill brought before us last year, and to which I shall have occasion briefly to refer. I do not propose to criticize the details of the measure, because there are honourable mem- bers who have been on the Commission and on different Education Boards of the colony. ] do, however, desire to point out to the House the very important effect that this measure may have upon the increase of the educational expenditure. That is a point to which I doubt whether the Premier himself has given the attention that is desirable. It is not, Sir, a question merely of increasing the expenditure on the present basis : it is a new basis that is being set up by this Bill. At the present time a payment of £3 15s. per head on the average attendance is made to the Boards, and upon this basis the Education Boards are compelled, in order to equalise their expenditure, to re- strict in some cases the establishment of schools. They are compelled to exercise this economy, because the amount at their dis- posal is limited by the attendance. Now, I ask, What is going to be the effect under this Bill? All that the Education Boards will have to do will be to pay over to the teachers the money handed to them by the State. You are now going, by this Bill, to say to every Education Board in New Zealand, "Open as many schools as you choose, wherever you choose : the State will pay the salaries." And that inference was clearly to be understood from the remarks of the Right Hon. the Pre- mier, where he discussed the position of the people in the back blocks. Sir, I have every sympathy with the man who goes into the back blocks and undertakes the work of coloni- sation there; but I am not prepared to admit that wherever one, two, or three families have settled, that there the State must establish a school. There is not in the Education Act any limit as to the number of schools that may be established. In last year's Bill the Govern- ment took precautions in this matter. One clause, which was not passed by the House, was this :- "Except within a borough no public school shall, after the passing of this Act, be esta- blished within three miles of an existing public school without the approval of the Minister." There was thus a power-potential, I admit -in which the department took the right to veto the multiplication of schools. When a man chooses to go away from settlement he takes on himself, in connection with his family, certain responsibilities. Why do men go on to the back blocks? In a very large number of cases they do so because the land is cheap, and they can obtain blocks of land at a very much lower price of rental than if they remained nearer the centres of civilisation ; and part of the price they pay is the fact that they dis- that the children should pay the penalty, but I say you are now lessening the responsibility of the Boards in saying where new schools shall be set up. And you will find out how this will operate. There will be an increase in the num- ber of schools that will surprise members ; and as the schools are increased so the building grant must be increased. However, I consider this Bill is a great improvement on the one of last year, under which capitation was to be swept away, and the power of settling the amounts to be paid by the Boards was to be fixed by regula- tion. So far as there is a tendency in the Bill to centralise the administration of education I am opposed to it. I have always been in favour of decentralisation ; and honourable members will find that, following the line of argument I was using, they are now taking the first step-and a very important one-to bring our system of education under the hands of the Central Government, because, if the responsi- bility of the Boards in the setting-up of new schools is taken away, the next thing the Go- vernment will claim will be that they shall have the right to say under what circumstances new schools shall be established. The Government will say, " If we have to provide the finance of these schools, we must have the right to say under what circumstances new schools shall be established." And, when that is given, it is only one step for the Government to claim the right of appointing the school-teachers themselves. While pointing out these things I regard the proposals of the Bill, in so far as they improve the salaries of the teachers of the existing schools, as a great improvement upon what has obtained. But, Sir, I think that it would have been better if we had had a plan by which the Government could have increased the capita- tion in sparsely populated districts such as those mentioned by the member for Masterton - I refer to Westland, Greymouth, Marl- borough, and Nelson. I think that if power were given by which the capitation in such districts could be increased, then we would have all the advantages of this Bill, and what I think may be the possible disadvan- tages, which I have endeavoured briefly to point out, would not have repeated them- selves. There is no need to emphasize the importance of our education system to the colony. A very great and noble work has been done by it up to the present. I think, myself, that many teachers are under-paid. I desire to see their pay placed upon an assured footing, and that they shall be given what is commonly known as an "assured finance"; but I do not want to see our splendid education system brought any more than is absolutely necessary into the hands of the General Government. I believe, as I have said, that by shifting the responsibility for the establishment of new schools entirely from the Education Boards the position will be that the Government, without intending it-I do not charge them with intentionally aiming this blow at the education system, but one result will be that they will claim the right to deter- 
<page>614</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=654</url>
shall be established, and the logical result will be that they will claim the right to say under what circumstances the teachers shall be ap- pointed also. When that is reached our educa- tion system will have entered upon a critical period. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin). - While I agree with a great deal that has been stated by the Premier in introducing this Bill, and while I agree with the principle of the measure, I want to say this, as one who has consistently sup- ported the principle of a colonial scale of salaries for public-school teachers : I am exceed- ingly disappointed with the report of the School- teachers Commission, embodied as it is in the Bill now before the House, and for this reason : that it does not do that justice to the country school teachers to which they are entitled, and which they deserve. This is especially the case in teachers of schools with an average attend- ance of under twenty. In the Auckland Pro- vincial District, with which I am best ac- quainted, there are a large number of such schools. The Auckland Board of Education has been paying the teachers of these small schools at the rate of from £100 to £114 per annum ; but in the Bill now before the House, which is supposed to be an improvement on the existing system, we propose to pay them at the rate of €5 per head for the average attendance. I have here a long list of schools, and I shall quote a few instances showing the effect of what is proposed :-  Salary. . posed. Reduc- Name. tion. Pro- School. sent. l're- - - Blakey, F. E. .. Albertland N'th 108 75 33 (15) Downard, F. N. R Owhiwa (15) .. \|108 75 33 Green, B. M. Mahurangi Hds. 108 28 80 .. (16) Hill, J. C. Greenhithe (17) 108 23 85 .. Birss, W. Opua (17) 108 23 85 .. Females. Gledhill, E. A. Kariotahi (16). . .. 85' 80 5 Jane, A. J. Matamata (15) 80 75 5 .. Brain, E. E. Te Puke (11) 78 55 23 .. .. Usher, A. Waiau 70 50 20 . . .. I think I have quoted a sufficient 9.30. number to show that, as far as the schools with an attendance of under twenty are concerned, the proposals of the Bill are grossly unfair. And, Sir, that will tend to impair the efficiency of many of our small country schools, because any fairly good teacher would rather leave the service than be satis- fied with the miserable pittance offered to him by way of salary. Then, there is another and a larger class of teachers not fairly treated. I refer to the teachers of schools with an attendance of between thirty and sixty. Of Mr. G. W. Russell crease for those teachers, but that increase is not in proportion to the increases pro- posed to be given to the teachers of larger schools. One would have thought that on an occasion like this, when a readjustment was being made, special consideration would have been given to the teachers of schools in country districts, because they have to put up with a great many drawbacks and disadvan- tages of which the teachers in towns know very little. But the Commission have evi- dently gone on the principle that "To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath." Under this proposed system one of the difficulties which at present exists will be still further accentuated-that is, the unwilling- ness on the part of teachers in towns to go into the country districts. I have heard over and over again of cases where female teachers, who were receiving from $40 to $45 per annum in the cities by way of salaries, actually refused to go into the country districts when offered salaries at from $70 to $80. I noticed that Mr. Bagnall, the Chairman of the Education Board at Auckland, in giving evidence before the Com- mission, referred to this particular point, and in answer to a question he said,- " In this district, with regard to the smaller positions, we find that female assistants will remain in Auckland at a salary of $45 a year rather than take a similar position in the coun- try at $70 a year." Then, he was asked,- " You think they prefer to remain in town on account of the social and other advanages of city life ?" And his reply was :- " ] can only suppose so. I have not friends in the positions. My experience as a member of the Board shows it is difficult to get a female assistant to go into the country." In the face of such evidence, coming from a man of Mr. Bagnall's experience, we can come to no other conclusion than that the proposals in the Bill are inadequate, and that in some respects they are no improvement on the present position ; and that is the opinion of many of the teachers in the country districts. I have presented a petition on this subject from sixty head-teachers in country schools in the Auckland Provincial District, and I shall quote what they say :- "We, the undersigned head - teachers of country schools under the Auckland Board of Education, do herewith respectfully protest against the colonial scale of teachers' salaries being made lower in the form presented by the Commission to your honourable House. We deem it necessary to bring under your notice the following incongruities, and pray you to alter and amend them, so that the colonial scale will be of material benefit to us. Male teachers of schools of an average attendance of thirty do not, under the proposed scale, receive any increase at all ; and schools of forty, fifty, and sixty average only 3}, 3%, and 13 per cent. increases respectively. It is difficult to realise 
<page>615</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=655</url>
the highest degree of efficiency in country schools.' (Vide Commissioners' report.) Messrs. Petrie and Rice, two of our greatest authorities on schools and school working, admitted to the Commissioners when in Auckland that the salaries of assistants were high compared with those of headmasters. Mr. Petrie said : 4 Teachers of schools from thirty-five to a hun- dred had far more exacting work'; yet when an adjustment of salaries is being made these very teachers are given the smallest increases, whilst females in charge of schools and female assist- ants, who have not nearly the same responsi- bilities, are to receive increases of from 20 to 00 per cent. This seems to us unfair, and we desire to bring it before you, so that a more equitable allocation of salary may be made. Our present position, from the smallness of our salaries and the arduousness of our duties, is not as good as it should be, and we trust that you will adjust the scale, giving male teachers in charge of schools averaging from thirty to sixty an increase on our present sala- ries of at least 20 per cent. We would also pray that individually we may be classified, and that our promotion in future depend upon such classification, determined by length of service and the reports and marks of Inspectors. If this were done we should have a greater sense of security in our positions, and it would en- courage even more strenuous efforts on our part to merit good reports, and so gain the Inspec- tor's coveted marks; thus both we and the system would be benefited." As I have said, that petition is from sixty- two head-teachers in the Auckland Provincial District ; and I have not the slightest doubt in my own mind but that hundreds of others in different parts of the colony are of exactly the same opinion. Under the circumstances, then, I would indorse what has been suggested by the member for Bruce-namely, that this matter should be allowed to stand over until next year. By so doing very little harm would be done, because we have already voted a bonus of 5s. per head in connection with the Education estimates, and teachers can be paid the in- crease in exactly the same way as they were paid last year. Now, Sir, the Premier, when speaking, said that no objection to this Bill had been made by the Education Boards of the colony. The member for Bruce pointed out that Otago did object. I have objections here from two important Boards of this colony. Mr McGOWAN .- What about the teachers ? Mr. MASSEY .- I have told you what the teachers think of the proposals, and now I am going to give you the opinion of the Boards. The Auckland Board says this :- " The effect of the proposed colonial scale of salaries, as set out in the report, upon these teachers is most serious to contemplate. The Board has lately improved their position by giving a fixed salary of £108 to a male teacher of a school of fifteen average, and a salary of £114 for an average of twenty. Under the proposed colonial scale these teachers will be reduced from £108 to $75 and from £114 to £100. below an average of fifteen, will suffer even greater reduction of salary, some to the extent of more than 40 per cent." Then, the Canterbury Board, speaking of the small schools again, says,- "That the provision as to the salaries of teachers in the small schools-namely, $5 per head on the average attendance-is insufficient, and will result in a number of small country schools being closed ; or, as an alternative, in the teachers receiving starvation wages." I know of no men in the colony better qualified to speak than the members of the Boards of Education of Auckland and Canterbury. Sir, I may say, in conclusion, that I would like to see this matter per- manently settled ; but I am strongly of opinion that what is proposed will be an injustice to a most deserving set of individuals, and that the interests of education generally will suffer. But, as I indicated when I commenced to speak, I do not propose to oppose the Bill. I will leave the responsibility with the Government, and when the Bill goes into Committee I will endeavour to amend it, if possible, wherever 1 think an amendment is necessary. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) .- Like seve- ral of the previous speakers, I do not intend to take up much of the time of the House in dis- cussing the details of this Bill over its second reading. I believe the question we have got to consider is not as to the details of the Bill, but whether the country demands a colonial scale of salaries for teachers. Now, I do not think there is a single man in the House but will agree with me when I say that there is an almost universal demand that the incongruities and injustices of the present system of paying public-school teachers should cease, and that we should begin to pay a colonial scale of sala- ries based on some rational system. Now, the honourable member for Bruce seemed to be desirous of throwing cold water on the Bill, and to deprecate any attempt to interfere with the power of the Boards of Education. I can quite understand the member for Bruce taking up this attitude. Iadmit that the best-paid teachers in New Zealand are the teachers of Otago, and I believe if there is any place in New Zealand in which a colonial scale of salaries will injuriously affect the teachers it will be in Otago. But, after all, we have got to do, not with the best- paid province of New Zealand, but with all the  provinces, and we have got to see how it will affect them all. In this connection I would just like to point out to the House what the average salaries paid to teachers amount to. I took this out from the reports of the different Boards of Education : The average salary paid in Marlborough is $02, in Taranaki it is $90, in Wellington $94, in Auckland $95, in North Canterbury it is £105, while in Otago it is $117, or nearly double what is paid to the teachers in Marlborough. As for sewing-mistresses, I find that in Taranaki or Wanganui they are paid on the average about $5 a year, and that rises until we come to Otago, where they are paid from $20 to $30 for the same duties. What 
<page>616</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=656</url>
schools, paid much higher salaries than it is our school-teachers being paid salaries equal proposed to pay them under this Bill. Perhaps, to the salaries that are paid to other servants of the State? My impression is that the however, we will get that righted in Committee, and I trust we shall. Now, there is one serious school-teaching profession ought to be the blemish in the report of the Commission, to aristocracy of the professions in the colony. It ought to be the best-paid profession. It is which I wish to draw the attention of the the one department which, above all the others, House. They do not recognise any certificate over the D certificate. I think that is an im- we cannot afford to pay badly. Those who are portant blemish, and one that we ought to engaged in that profession ought to be paid at a rate that would attract the brightest men do away with. We ought to insist on our and women in our midst. Instead of that it teachers holding a high standard of education. In California, in New South Wales, and in Vic- is actually the poorest-paid profession in our midst. The average salary paid to our school- toria they insist that no man shall have control teachers is $99 per head. That is, including of one of the first-class schools-six hundred the salaries paid to pupil-teachers, and ex- pupils and over-unless he holds the Al cer- clusive of sewing-mistresses. Under the new tificate. In this colony we are, under the pro- posed scale, to allow men to control first-class scale they are to get a rise of about £8 a year. That will give an average of £107 a year, as schools with D1 or D2 certificates. At any against $99 a year. At the present time the rate, we recognise that, after the D certificate, average salary paid to railway servants is £101 we 'do not expect any further educational at. a year, or $2 more than the average paid to the tainments from our teachers. Outside that school-teachers. The average salary paid to matter, I do not wish at this time to criticize the report of the Commission. I know they the post and telegraph officials is #124 a year, had many difficulties to contend with. They or 25 per cent. more than the average of the could not please everybody, and they have not school-teachers. The average salary paid to the pleased everybody; but I think we may amend officials of the Customs Department is £198 a year, and the average amount paid to the offi- the scale of salaries in Committee, and make it cials of our Agricultural Department is £207 a better than it is at present. I hope the House year. In view of facts such as these, is there will recognise the important position the teach- any man who will not say that it is high time ing profession occupies in the colony, and deal we put our school-teachers in a better position with that profession in no niggardly spirit. It As I will pay us to do this, and pay us handsomely. than they are in at the present time ?  have said, I am not going into the details of intention to oppose this Bill, which provides the scheme which is now laid before us. It for the introduction of a colonial scale of will be time enough to deal with these when the Bill is before the Committee. What I want salaries. Ever since I have been a member of this House I have brought that question up to point out is the absolute necessity for pro- #cc-zero year after year, and I am pleased that at last viding a colonial scale of salaries for our teachers, and that they should be paid at a much better we have a Bill before us for the purpose. It rate than they are at present, unless we want has always appeared to me somewhat anoma- lous that, although we had a colonial system to see our whole school system degenerate. In California, the average paid to women teachers of education, yet we had thirteen Boards of Education in the colony who were paying in the primary schools is £152, and the average paid to men teachers is £145, so that in Cali- different salaries to their teachers. It was, fornia at all events, the women have no cause indeed, an absurdity, because the money re- quired for the purpose of paying the salaries to to complain that the men are better paid than carry on the work of education is all drawn they are, because the women teachers are paid from the one source-the Public Account of there a larger sum per year than the men are. In all the schools in California, including the the colony. As has been stated by the member for Franklin, the proposed payment for teachers secondary schools, the average salary of the of schools with an average attendance of under men is $202, and the average salary of the women is #161; but in the primary schools, as twenty is a retrograde step, and I venture to I have pointed out, the women are better say that when the Bill becomes law there will be an outery all over the colony from teachers paid than the men. In New South Wales, the average sum paid to the school-teachers is of schools with an attendance of under twenty. £113 a year, and in Queensland it is £107 a year. Now, I have put these facts before the House to show that the school-teachers of the colony are the worst-paid class of public servants we have. the Bill out ; because, although it may not be I have also pointed out that, in comparison with the other colonies and with the State of Cali- a perfect one, it can be improved. However, as I have said, the Government will soon find fornia, our teachers are much more poorly paid ; and I wish to impress on the House the neces- out that there will be a commotion from one end of the colony to the other by the teachers sity of passing the Bill, although it may have of schools with an average attendance of under certain incongruities in connection with it. These things we may right after the measure twenty. Another matter that I should like to bring before the House is this : I do not like has been in operation for twelve months. Sir, the idea of staffing schools and paying salaries with other speakers, I admit I would like to see Mr. Laurenson Mr. BOLLARD (Eden) .- Sir, it is not my Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- Then, throw it out. Mr. BOLLARD. - Throw what out ? Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- The Bill. Mr. BOLLARD .-- No ; I do not want to throw 
<page>617</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=657</url>
be, in my opinion, some better provision than by staffing and paying schools on the average attendance in the country. That is all right in town schools, where there are good roads and footpaths ; but I have often pitied the teachers of small country schools, when, owing to wet weather and bad roads, the average attendance was brought down so low that the teacher only gets a starvation salary. I think that some better provision should be made for country schools than this Bill makes. I do not wish to detain the House on this matter, because I think the sooner we get into Committee on the Bill the better. In fact, I do not think we should waste much time over it in Committee ; because, as I take it, we cannot increase the salaries, and we are all against cutting them down, and so I think we might as well put the Bill through without delay, and probably this time twelve months we shall have to amend the Bill by increasing salaries that have been cut down by it. As I understand the matter, it is something like dealing with the estimates. We have no power of increasing the salaries, and, as we are not in favour of cutting them down, the sooner we let the Bill go through the better. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) .- I some- what regret that our Chairman of the Public- school Teachers' Salaries Commission should have spoken so early in this debate, because, from his official position, he might have been able to throw a good deal of light upon the  various questions that have been raised. agree with the speaker who has just sat down in this respect : that there is not a great deal of good to be done by a long discussion. I do not intend to discuss the Bill at any length, but I wish to reply briefly to some of the points raised. Personally, I deeply regret that the No. 2 scale was not accepted by the Government. Those associated with this work felt that the No. 1 scale was not adequate, but we were confined to the £4 vote. Had No. 2 scale been within the means of the Government we certainly would not have had the complaints we have heard to-night, and I hope when the Premier rises to reply he will announce the Government's intention to give effect now to No. 2 scale, because nothing less will meet the requirements of our system. In connection with the complaints, I think that it is not quite fair selecting the few reduced. I think he should also point out that the teachers are being largely benefited even in connection with No. 1 scale. The teachers in Auckland, Can- terbury, Otago, and Hawke's Bay Districts were the highest paid in the service, and we had thirteen education districts, and all had to be brought up to the level with the best paid teachers. If honourable members could only realise the great difference at present existing in the various education districts they would know what the difficulties were. The question was asked by the honourable member for Christchurch City (Mr. Smith) what was the object of appointing a Commission, and of their travelling round the country. Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- The honourable gentleman says, "It was a job," and the mem- bers were excellently well paid in connection with the work. They received €1 a day, and out of that paid their own expenses, so it was a very profitable undertaking for them ! Mr. HUTCHESON .- They paid their own expenses ? Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- Yes, they paid their own expenses. Does the honourable member say they did not ? I thought members of the House knew a little about Commissions. An Hon. MEMBER .- They did not pay their travelling-expenses. Mr. T. MACKENZIE. - Of course not. They paid all personal expenses, such as hotels, et cetera, but not train-fares. I wish to say, unless the Commission had visited the different parts of the colony, they could not have ob- tained a sufficient knowledge to enable them to understand the condition of education in many of the back districts and smaller education districts to frame an adequate report. The Secretary of the department drew up a scale with the information at his command before leaving Wellington ; but as the Commission went round the colony it was found that the conclu- sions of the department did not meet the exigencies of the various districts, and there were several alterations and modifications of the scale as the evidence justified it, and the Secretary gave valuable assistance. Then, we come to the question of why women were not represented on the Commission. I quite agree I that women ought to have been represented, considering the interests that women teachers have in the country. I placed this question before numbers of the women witnesses. There are more female teachers in the colony than male teachers ; and, if that is so, surely they ought to have a voice on a Commission so deeply affecting their interests. We come now to the statement that the recommendations were largely in favour of the male teachers of the country. I suppose honourable members will admit that the bulk of the female teachers are in the small schools in the colony, and there- fore, if we have extended to women teachers equal pay in all schools up to thirty, surely that is a great step in advance, and the salary of women teachers have been increased fully 25 per cent. It cannot be said, with the evi- dence at our disposal, the interests of the women teachers were overlooked. We have the complaint from Otago that the interests of the men were sacrificed to those of the women, and we have the member for Christchurch City saying that the interests of the women were sacrificed to those of the men. I say 10.30. that during my whole experience on that Commission I did the very best I could to see that the utmost justice was done for the female teachers ; but we found, from the evi- dence of the female teachers themselves, that those teachers who came before the Commis- sion did not agree that equal payment should be meted out to men and women teachers. I find, on looking up the returns, that in 
<page>618</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=658</url>
which have under thirty-five pupils - that is to say, a great deal more than half the schools in the colony have an attendance under thirty-five. The total number of schools in the colony is 1,673, so that if we have extended in- creases to women in all schools of under thirty it will embrace the majority of the schools in the country. I find that in the Auckland Pro- vincial District no less than 208 schools out of 354 have an average attendance of under thirty- five. Now, just before the supper adjournment I was about to quote the opinion of the leading women as to the position that the allowances to women should occupy. I put this question to Miss Lorimer, one of the ablest teachers that came before our Commission, if not the ablest :- "I assume that you are in favour of equal payment for men and women-at any rate, up to a certain standard of school ?" And she replied,- "No; I have not said that. I think the minimum salary for a woman should be £100, and for a man £110. "There should be a difference even at that point ?- Yes, I think so." Then, there are other opinions expressed of similar nature, but I have not time to give them now. As to the question of equal payment, of course, the female teachers themselves urged, and the Commissioners took, this view : that the responsibility of a man as the head of a family was very considerable, and that as his obligations required a greater income, you had to consider the family life of a teacher. And there was another view expressed : that if you raised the salaries of the women to the same #cc-zero . level as those of the men, the men would very probably be selected to the exclusion of women, and there were other reasons which I need not dwell upon at the present time. There was, for instance, the question of the number of women who did not continue in the service. Men made a life - work of teaching, and it could not be said that the majority of women did. In the Provincial District of Otago, within a certain period of years, three out of every four women teachers had gone out of the service, whereas a very small proportion indeed of the male teachers had left the service. At the same time I took this view, which was opposed to the view of many of the male teachers : They urged that the women should not be intrusted with work beyond the Third Standard. I urged, and it has been adopted, that the head-teacher and the Boards should have the right to give a female teacher work up to the higher standards if she is strong enough and has the ability to undertake it ; and that has been given effect to. An Hon. MEMBER .- What about the pay- ment ? Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- The payment should correspond, of course. Then, the honourable member for Kaiapoi and several others alluded to what was suffered by schools of under fourteen. Now, let me say that I was exceed. ingly sorry to see schools under fourteen Mr. T. Mackenzie is adopted, then they will be much better treated, because Boards will then have funds to go and come on to do greater justice to these small schools. I did not agree that the schools of under fourteen in the whole of the Provin- cial Districts of Otago, Auckland, and Canter- bury, where the increase in the number of schools had not arisen as it had in regard to other districts, should be cut down as much \- - But let me say what as they have been. the difficulty was before the Commissioners in this connection. You have in Marlborough, Westland, the Grey, and Nelson districts an enormous number of very small schools, and if you fix a minimum rate of pay, then the money at our disposal is wholly inadequate to meet the difficulty. In Nelson, for instance, there are sixty schools of under fifteen pupils out of a total of 120 schools, and twenty-four of these have an attendance of under nine. Then we come to Marlborough, and no less than thirty-nine schools in that provincial dis- trict have an attendance of under nine out of a total of sixty-six schools-some with only two and three pupils. Therefore we say that, if we fixed a minimum salary for all the teachers of these schools, the money at our disposal was absolutely inadequate. If we come to the Pro- vincial District of Otago, which has been al- luded to by the honourable member for Bruce, who said it had suffered, we find that the pay- ment to teachers of schools of under twenty is £2,725 in addition to what is at present paid there. I will now give members some of the figures to show how the teachers there are affected :-- Schools under Twenty Pupils. Otago Board's Average Suggested Increase. Attendance. Scale. Scale. 3 3 £ 14 70 0 70 .. .. . . 15 5 70 75 .. 16 10 80 70 . 15 17 70 85 .. .. .. 20 90 18 70 .. . . .. 19 25 70 95 . . 30 20 100 70 .. .. . . From Twenty to Thirty Pupils. 20 15 85 100 . .. . . 21 85 1033 18} .. 22 107 85 22 . . .. 253 110} 23 85 . . 29 114 24 85 . . 32} 25 117} 85 .. .. 121 21 26 100 . . 24} 27 124} 100 . .. . 2.8 28 128 100 . . . . 29 131} 100 . . .. .. 135 35 100 30 . . An Hon. MEMBER. - What about country schools ? Mr. T. MACKENZIE. - I have just told you about the country schools. There are in the Pro- vincial District of Otago twenty-one schools of under fourteen, and, as two years will expire be- fore this Act can come into operation, it is hoped 
<page>619</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=659</url>
for many of the good teachers in these small schools. In reply to the many objections taken to the scale of payment to the second male as- sistants, I might say that there were fifty-one second male assistants in New Zealand. Half of these will receive an increase of salary, and the other half (approximately) are reduced by the proposed scale. In Otago there are ten. Two of these are already appointed to country schools ; the others will not be affected by reductions for two years if No. 1 scale be adopted. The appointing of second assistant male teachers to country schools was one of the objects of the Commission for a twofold reason : Firstly, that country schools might have the benefit of well-trained teachers ; and, secondly, that, by the vacancies so created from town to country, some young men from the country might possibly get town appointments, so that they might obtain the advantage of attending the university, and be able to advance in their profession. It is also to be hoped, as the Premier indicated, that they will be able to adopt a higher scale; and, if it is adopted, there will be no appreciable loss whatever, because there will be, as I have already indicated, a margin on which the Board itself can come and go, and, where there is not such a large number of schools, as in the case of Otago, they will be able to increase the salary to something more adequate. But let me say in this connection that I am thoroughly in accord with those who are anxious to pay the very best attention to the children of our settlers in the back districts. I say this colony would be lacking in its responsi- bility and duty to the people of the country if it did not strain every point to extend the very best educational advantages within its power to those people who go into the back blocks. I do not agree at all with the honourable member for Riccarton, who said that people went back there because they got the land at a lower price. They go back there because they want to ob- tain homes for themselves, and because for many reasons they are not able to settle nearer the centres of population; and it is to these people, who constitute the vanguard of colo- nisation, that the very greatest consideration should be extended. Now, I come to the ques- tion that was mentioned by the honourable member for Franklin. The honourable mem- ber selected a number of salaries, and pointed out how female teachers of schools under six- teen or fourteen suffered. Then, we also had the statement that the schools between thirty and sixty had suffered, and the honourable gentleman gave us a little Bible quotation- that "to him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath." Now, let us, first of all, refer to this Provincial District of Auck- land, under the benign influence of the present reign, and we find there that female teachers in some schools only get £32. Mr. MASSEY .- Not head-teachers. Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- I do not say what they are. They are the head-teachers in some cases as well as teachers. parents. Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- I know that; but that is all they get from the Education Board. The parents will not cease to give something in addition; and they will get under the scale $40, instead of the £32 they now get from the Auckland Provincial District. There is no doubt about that. And if the honourable gentleman will look at page 20 of the Education Report he will find it is so. Then, we are told that between this thirty and sixty they suffer. Under the present scale teachers with forty-five pupils get £160 a year and a free house and an assistant. That cannot be said to be so very bad. I see that in Auckland under the old scale a teacher having forty-seven pupils only had £150. Now let us look to see how Auckland is treated. The statement was made that between thirty and sixty the teachers are suffering, and that is the statement I am replying to. Mr. MASSEY .- Will the honourable gentle- man allow me ? What I said was, that in the schools between thirty and sixty the increases given were not in proportion to the increases given in the case of larger schools. Mr. T. MACKENZIE .-- That is not what I took down, but I accept the honourable gentle- man's explanation, and we will see what the increases are, and he will see that he is wrong in his other contention also. Here is a school with fifty-five, and the increase there is from £150 to £171. I think that is a very fair in- crease. Here is a female teacher who has an increase from $140 to £155, another from £108 to £144, and from £108 to £141, and there are & good many similar cases throughout this report. And then below these numbers [ find there are few, comparatively, who have suffered reductions ; and I think, when you consider the enormous amount of leeway that had to be made up in connection with some of the other districts, you will find, with some exceptions, and I regret that they were touched, that the Commission did remarkably well with the funds at its disposal. Let us now refer to some of the smaller and poorer districts, and we find that, while we have got complaints from some in the richer districts, there are no complaints from Taranaki, Marlborough, Nelson, Grey, and Here is what has many of these districts. occurred in Taranaki. Here are some increases from £103 to $151, from $110 to $149, from £106 to £145; and these are male teachers. Let us come to the female teachers. The first on the list are £84 to £128, £86 to £137, £87 to £135, and so on. Then, take a poorer district, say Marlborough. Here we find male teachers increased from £106 to £151. Now, these teachers for all these years have been labouring for most inadequate re- muneration, and now they are being brought more into line, and my only wonder is that, with the money at the disposal of the Com- mission, they were able to do as well as they have for the districts which have been enjoying a higher remuneration in the past. In the smaller schools under twenty, there is an increase 
<page>620</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=660</url>
female on list from $29 to $40, $116 to £142, $90 to $114. When we come to the total in- creases of the allowances to provincial districts we find that in Taranaki the increases given to female teachers bring the total from $1,109 to $2.240. That is more than 100 per cent., and surely it cannot be said therefore, that the female teachers have not had some consideration. Taking the total of the vote for that provincial district it has increased from £8,174 to #11,406. Reference was made by the member for Lyttel- ton to the payment of salaries to schools in Queensland, the average being $107. Of course one cannot say how that will pan out without the details; but I find from the New Zealand Journal of Education that the salaries paid in this colony, as contrasted with the salaries paid in the several Australian States for schools of twenty and under, are, it says,- Average Salary. Attendance. Queensland. . M 90 12 to 20 F 70 .. New South Wales 68 12 to 15 . 15 to 18 80 .. 18 to 20 91 . . 72 South Australia 12 to 15 66 to 78 to 87 15 to 18 90 to 96 18 to 20 New Zealand 12 to 20 70 to 100 I think, considering all things, our district is not so much behind the adjacent colonies. It is not my intention to-night to enter largely upon  the scope of the question, and I have risen rather with a view, if possible, of throwing some light on questions raised. I sympathize with my co-members representing country districts in their efforts to have their teachers given the very highest remuneration possible; and I be- lieve, myself, that, unless New Zealand gives to its teachers the very best conditions, New Zea- land will not be able to hold its own in the race of competition of the world. We are a small country competing against enormous disadvan- tages, and competing against countries with facilities of trade and other privileges we do not possess ; and if the people of this country are to hold their own we must have the highest class of teachers possible, reasonably paid, in order to instruct our youths, that they may devote themselves to the development of the natural endowments of this country, and pro- duce in the most efficient manner. And I, personally, will hail with delight the announce- ment next year, and, if possible, even now, of the Premier that he is able to give effect to the recommended Scale 2. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) .- The question of the Public School Teachers' Salaries Bill is a most interesting one ; hence so many members speaking on the question this evening. I do not approach the question in a factious spirit, but rather in a friendly manner. The object of the Bill, stated in the title, is to remove the existing anomalies and inequalities in the staffing of public-schools and in the salaries paid to public-school teachers. That is a very good object indeed, Sir ; but I venture to think Mr. T Mackenzie consideration, within the next two years there 1 will be found to arise a crop of anomalies and inequalities equal to, if not more than, those that exist under the present Act. The Premier, in his opening remarks, stated that the object of the Bill was to reduce chaos to order. That is no doubt a very good object, and I sincerely hope it will be attained. Sir, credit is due to the compilers of the Education Act of 1877, and the country is indebted to them for the intelligence, wisdom, and foresight they displayed in compiling that Act. Credit is due to the Hon. Mr. C. C. Bowen. That gentleman is looked upon throughout the length and breadth of the colony by authorities on education as the father of the Education Act; and an Act that has stood so well for twenty-four years must have been carefully thought out. I do not look upon that Act, however, as a fetish. I believe that the intel- ligence and altered conditions of the people de- CH mand some modification in that Act, and I . sincerely hope that this Bill will result in an improvement in our education system. I can- not help thinking that, while I give credit to the Commission for the amount of useful in- formation they obtained during the inquiry, the Commission might have been differently constituted. For instance, in the first place I notice that the two school-teachers on the Commission only held D certificates. In the classification - list of public teachers of the colony there are nine ranks, five grades, and five classes in each grade. The two teachers on the Commission are in the fourth rank. Sir, it appears to me that in setting up a Commission it is the duty of the pro- moters of that Commission to select the very best talent at their command. Why, then, were not some of our public teachers selected from the first, second, or third ranks ? In rank 1 there are sixteen male teachers, in rank 2 there are ninety-four teachers, and in 1 rank 3 there are 123 teachers; so that the Minister of Education had no less than 243 teachers holding a much higher certificate and more highly qualified than the two teachers on the Commission. I do not say this disparag- ingly of the two teachers on the Commission- no doubt they are excellent men in their way ; but in forming a Commission of this nature the Minister of Education should have availed himself of the highest talent and qualification within the teaching profession. I concur with members who have spoken in their contention that the women teachers of the colony, who represent 60 per cent. of the teachers employed in our primary schools, should have been re- presented on the Commission. Two women teachers ought to have been on the Commis- sion. There are four female teachers in rank 1, nine teachers in rank 2, and fifteen teachers in rank 3. So there were twenty - eight women teachers of high qualifications to select from if the promoters of the Com- mission had desired to do so, and that would have been only fair to the women teachers of the colony. If two women teachers 
<page>621</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=661</url>
had been on the Commission it would have greatly added to the usefulness of the Commis- sion, and I believe the information that might have been obtained through their influence would have been greater than is now contained ' in the report of the Commission. Sir, I believe a majority of the teachers of the colony are in favour of the Bill now before the House for second reading, and in favour of the scale of salaries contained therein. A number of teach- ers, however, have petitioned the House, not only on the scale of salaries, but on a number of other matters affecting primary education, referred to in the report of the Commission. Fourteen of those petitions came before the M to Z Public Petitions Committee, and in support of those petitions seven women teach- ers attended and gave evidence; and I venture to think the members of the Committee have been most favourably impressed with their in- telligence, capability, and grasp of education questions. The finding of the Committee was that the Committee recommended,- " 1. That the principle of equal pay for equal work is more nearly attained by the proposed colonial scale of salaries than under the exist- ing circumstances ; but at the same time the Committee is of opinion that, without increas- ing the cost of primary education, the proposed scale of teachers' salaries for assistants should be so adjusted as to bring about a nearer ap- proximation of equal pay for equal work. "2. That the separate schools for girls, at present established, be retained, and the prin- ciple extended at the discretion of the Educa- tion Boards, a minimum average attendance for separate schools to be fixed by regulation or otherwise. "3. That the system of classification for the issue of teachers' certificates, which has been so long in operation and has worked so satisfac- torily, be retained. "4. That the minimum salary of certificated teachers in charge of aided schools be fixed at not less than £70 a year." The Premier and honourablo mem- 11.0. bers may not be acquainted with the report that was brought down by the Public Petitions Committee. Hence I have read the findings of the Committee. Sir, from 1878 to 1887, in addition to the statutory allowance of £3 15s. for each child in average attendance, there was a special capitation allowance varying from 4s. to 10s. for each child in average attend- ance ; but when retrenchment was insisted upon in 1887 this special capitation allowance was dis- continued. That brought about a shortage of finance with Education Boards throughout the colony, and, not having sufficient allowance for incidentals, the Boards were forced to in- trench upon the statutory allowance of teachers' salaries ; hence, since 1887 teachers' salaries have been reduced in the colony, while during the same time teachers' salaries have been raised in the United Kingdom from 35 to 48 per cent. It is true, last year the vote of $8,000 was divided amongst the various Educa- tion Boards to supplement teachers' salaries, the average increase being $2 5s. for each VOL. CXIX .- 41. teacher in the colony. It is proposed by the present Bill to increase salaries by the sum of $28,000. I hail this increase with considerable satisfaction. The Government should approach this question in a liberal spirit. I may, how- ever, point this out to the House and country : that during the eleven years of Liberal ad- ministration of the present Government the primary schools of the colony have been prac- tically starved. At length tardy Justice opens her doors and comes to the relief of the public school-teachers of the colony. We have had the salary of the Governor increased by 40 per cent., of the Ministers by 25 per cent., of the Premier by 60 per cent. ; the Railway, Postal, and Telegraph Departments, under the Classifi- cation Act, have increased by annual incre- ments; the salaries of officials in every de- partment of the public service have gone up year by year ; skilled and unskilled labour has gone up by 50 per cent. : but the salaries of teachers throughout the colony, instead of going up, have actually gone down. It must be obvious to every member of the House who knows the power of the Premier that, if he had felt disposed at any time during the past eleven years, it was competent for him years ago to have made the statutory grant £4, or even £4 5s., for each child in average attend- ance. Such a proposal would have been gladly accepted by the House and country, and no money would have been voted with greater pleasure by the representatives of the people. The proposed scale now embodied in the Bill has been referred to as a liberal one. I should like to point out that, under Scale A, the highest salary possible for teachers to obtain is $374 a year. A teacher who has spent a lifetime in his profession-perhaps twenty-five or thirty years-may consider himself lucky if he gets £374. Under Scale B it is possible for him to obtain £380. How do these figures compare with the inducements held out in connection with other departments of the public ser- vice? In the Prisons Department an officer can reach $700 a year, in the Police £600, in the Lands and Survey Department £750, and in Lunatic Asylums £1,200; while it is not possible for a teacher, however devoted he may be, or however high his qualification, to obtain a higher salary than £374. If we are to hold out inducements to the best talent in the colony for high aspirations -- for men and women to qualify themselves in a high degree to take charge of our schools- we should be more liberal in the inducements we offer in the shape of salary. Sir, the Commissioners re- commend the abolition of the present system of issuing certificates, and reducing the number to two. I emphatically assert that such a pro- posal would be injurious. The present system, which has obtained for a number of years, has given great satisfaction. There are nine ranks, five grades, and five classes. The class shows the degree of scholarship attained, and the grade shows the degree of efficiency, so that when both go together you have a teacher who not only commands the respect of all those in- terested in public education, but one who is 
<page>622</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=662</url>
likely to render valuable service. I notice the Otago Education Board condemned very severely the proposal embodied in the report to reduce the number of certificates to two. This is the statement made by the Board :--- "The Board emphatically protests against the recommendation of the Commission that only two grades of certificates of competency be issued by the department, and against the pro- posed non-recognition of university degrees. The Board views this last recommendation as being a retrograde step, and unworthy of a Royal Commission on teachers' salaries; and the Board is of opinion that, if there is to be any reduction in the number of classes of certifi- cates, such reduction should begin at the lowest." Sir, a word on separate schools : At the pre- sent time there are six girls' schools, distinctly separate, under the control of a headmistress and women assistants. There are six others where-though the schools are under a head- master-the sexes are in different portions of the building, and the girls are under a head- mistress. It is desirable that these separate schools should be retained as prizes to our women teachers. Men will inevitably be ap- pointed to our large schools as headmasters, and inducements could be offered to our young women to qualify in a high degree for schools by way of appointments as headmistresses to separate schools and infant mistresses. The women teachers in the Wellington Provin- cial District have drawn up a petition which has been presented to Parliament praying for a continuance of these separate schools. In the finding of the Committee of the House a strong recommendation is made in favour of retaining separate schools and increasing them under certain conditions. A reflection has been cast by one or two members on the women teachers of the colony. No doubt there is a difference in the physical qualification of men and women -that will always be a disability under which women will suffer; but, so far as teaching is concerned, I venture to say, without fear of contradiction, that women teachers are as capable of doing good work and of imparting sound education as men teachers. I am in the habit of visiting some of the city schools in Wellington during the sessions of Parliament, and during the present session I visited the Mount Cook Girls' School. That school has an average attendance of about five hun- dred girls, and I noticed that there is a large class, consisting of some 10 per cent., in what is known as the Seventh Standard- girls who have passed the Sixth Standard, and who are preparing to pass the first stage of the B.A. degree, and otherwise qualifying them- selves for useful positions. These pupils are mostly the daughters of poor parents, who could not afford to send their daughters to the secondary schools. Amongst the scholars who have passed through this school there is a large number of winners of open scholarships given by the Education Board and the Univer- sity, and they have gained these scholarships with credit to themselves and their teachers. Mr. Meredith Their success in open competition showed the thorough grounding they had received in the Mount Cook Girls' School. Sir, a word on the question of equal pay for equal work. I notice that Mr. Hill, Inspector of Schools for Hawke's . Bay, in his examination of the Inspector- General, asked him if he did not believe in equal pay for equal work. The reply of the Inspector-General was that he believed in equal pay for equal burdens. That appears to me to be an abstraction. It may be very good in theory, but I think it would be 1 difficult to apply it in practice. Are we in the habit of doing so at the present time? Are we in the habit of differentiating salaries ac- cording to equal burdens ? Certainly not. Take, for example, the Minister for Public Works-he is blessed with a large family ; while the family of the Minister of Justice is repre- sented by a unit. Are we to differentiate in salaries there? On the principle of equal pay for equal burdens we should have to take at least £200 from the salary of the Minister of Justice and add it to the salary of the Minister for Public Works. On the other hand, if we con- sider the Premier and his large family, surely that gentleman is entitled to a much larger salary than any other member of the Ministry, on the ground of equal pay for equal burden. But we are not in the habit of doing that. In one of the drapery firms doing business in Wellington we find that the head dressmaker, who may be a spinster, is in receipt of £400 a. year, while the dressmaker working at a table, and who has charge of two or three assistants, and who is a widow with several children, receives £1 10s. per week. Again, the as- sumption is that the equal burdens are entirely with the male teachers. I contend that is not a correct assumption. We often find that a woman teacher has aged parents to keep ; but she does not receive the same salary, on the principle of equal pay for equal burden, that a male teacher would receive in a similar position. Then, it often happens that a woman teacher has not only aged parents to keep, but also an invalid sister or brother. Sir, coming to the question of small country schools, I con- tend that it will be the duty of the Government to deal liberally with those settlers who have left the centres of population and have gone back into remote districts, and who have esta- blished themselves in homes in isolated locali- ties, cut off from society, from the advantages of educational institutions such as obtain in the large centres of population, from reading- rooms, libraries, and so forth. It is our duty, at least, to give those parents an op- portunity of educating their children. If the principle embodied in this Bill is adopted- that is, £5 for each child in average attend- ance-a gross injustice will be done to the class of settlers I refer to. The difficulty, how- ever, is not so great as honourable members may think. In Canterbury the minimum salary is $65 a year. In Otago it is $70 a year. That : is what is called the lowest living-wage. The Bill provides that where there are fourteen scholars of an average attendance there will be 
<page>623</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=663</url>
a salary of £70, but if it comes down to eight the salary will be only £40. What is to be done to supplement that salary to bring it up to a liv- ing-wage? Is the Education Department to levy a tax upon those two or three families who may have, say, eight children under school age, and eight of school age ? That is not the way to settle the people on the land. I say it is our duty to follow up these people, and provide them the means of giving their children a free educa- tion. It may be fixed in this way : Where the average attendance is not less than eight the minimum salary should be not less than £70 a year. I think that would meet the difficulty, and do justice to our country settlers. Sir, I am pleased to notice in the report of the Com- mission that there is no disposition to abolish Education Boards. I rather feared that ; but the report of the Commission does justice to those valuable local bodies, the Education Boards. It states,- "Noting the good work that has been done, we have endeavoured to so guard the introduc- tion of a colonial scheme that the influence of Boards will in no way suffer. The valuable evidence that was given by members and Secre- taries of Education Boards stands as a monu- ment of their earnestness and capacity in fostering the interests of the primary schools ; so, too, the evidence of teachers shows that Boards have not been unmindful of the im- portance of selecting men and women of intelligence and wide influence for good."  Sir, when the honourable member for Wel- lington City (Mr. Fisher) was Minister of Education, and was called upon to retrench, he submitted the question of retrenchment to the various Inspectors employed by the Education Boards for suggestions ; and the present Inspector-General, when asked to give his opinion, recommended the abolition of the Education Boards. It is quite possible for the Inspector-General to change his opinion. I sincerely hope he has seen the error of his way, and I judge that he has done so by the altered opinion of the Inspector- General, as reflected in the statement I have just read from the report of the Commission. I hope there is nothing to arouse suspicion-to lead us to believe there is any attempt made to interfere with local supervision. One of the best features of our education system is the efficiency of local supervision. Sir, I hope the Premier will see his way to adopt the B scale- that is, to arrange that the parliamentary allo- cation shall be at the rate of $4 2s. 6d. The Premier distinctly stated earlier in the session that he would adopt the B scale recommended by the Commission, which means only an additional £14,000 a year. The proposal is to increase the salaries by £28,000; and we should go a little further, and increase them bv £14,000 more. We should then have a scale of salaries that would recommend itself to the House, to the teachers in charge of our schools, and, indeed, to the country at large. I hope the Premier will be able to do so. I notice that America, Switzerland, and the colonies spend more than double upon educa- tion what they spend on defence : while, on the other hand, in the United Kingdom I notice four times as much is spent on the army and navy as on education. It is not necessary for me to say anything more in connection with this subject. I hope the Bill will go into Com- mittee, and that, with a few amendments, especially in the direction I have indicated in the matter of providing for small schools in country districts, it will pass through Com- mittee, and that before the House rises it will be read a third time, and in due course pass on to the statute-book. I shall be happy to do all I can to place it on the statute-book. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) .- This Bill, I feel, is a start in the right direction. There has been a great demand from all parts of the colony, and especially from the district I represent, for a classification scheme. Classi- fication is necessarily a very difficult subject to bring in and perfect, but, provided a little more attention is paid to the requirements of the country districts, and to primary education in the outlying settlements, I think the Bill on the whole will give satisfaction. As regards the expression of opinion of the teachers, I have received from the male teachers of Auck- land the following letter :- " Beresford Street School, Auckland, 2nd September, 1901. "SIR,-Although the proposed colonial scale of staff and salaries is not in every detail just what each teacher may desire, there is no doubt that, taken generally, it is a measure which commends itself to teachers. As a pro- fession we stand to gain so much by this scale that no quibbles over minor points should be allowed to interfere with the immediate intro- duction of this reform. In this teachers are almost generally agreed. At a full meeting of headmaster, assistant masters and mistresses, and pupil-teachers, held in this school on Wed- nesday last, the following motion was carried by a majority of fourteen to one : 'That, in the interests of teachers generally, the wishes of no one class of teachers should be allowed to jeopardize the immediate adoption of the colonial scale of staff and salaries, which by the vast majority of teachers will be viewed as the successful culmination of a long-needed reform.'" That is signed by " E. T. Hart, Headmaster." Now, the ladies, who have already in many cases had the advantage of about 20 per cent. increase, have met, and on the 6th September they sent me the following letter :- " Beresford Street School, Auckland, 6th September, 1901. "SIR,-At a meeting of lady teachers, held in Wellesley Street School on Thursday, 5th Sep- tember, the following resolution was passed unanimously : 'That the women teachers of Auckland, recognising that under existing cir- cumstances the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' is impracticable, are not in sym- pathy with the action lately taken by the Can- terbury women teachers. They also wish to place on record (1) their appreciation of the effort of the Royal Commission to reduce the 
<page>624</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=664</url>
great disparity between the salaries of male and female teachers, and (2) their general ap- proval of the proposed colonial scale of staffs and salaries, which metes cut juster treatment to female teachers. I trust the information will be of use to you in furthering our interests by urging the immediate adoption of the scale. -I have, &c., "MARY J. MCILHONE. "J. H. Witheford, Esq., M.H.R., Wellington." I am not going to detain the House. I shall support the Bill, and in Committee I trust that several necessary amendments will be made. Mr. BENNET (Tuapeka) .- Like the honour- able gentleman who has just sat down, I will only keep the House a few minutes with my remarks. I must say, with reference to this Bill, although it is not, perhaps, a perfect Bill, yet I think it is as near perfect as we can pos- sibly expect the Bill to come down to us. It would be impossible to get a perfect Bill all at once. I think the Bill will be a good one, and the only fault I have to find with it is that not sufficient provision is made for the schools esta- blished in the back blocks. Probably at another time that difficulty will be got over. Some honourable members have spoken with refer- ence to the districts I refer to. The honour- able member for Riccarton thought there was a chance that this would greatly increase the small schools ; but that has not been the case in the past, although the conditions were more  favourable. I would remind the House that it is these people-the farmers, squatters, and miners -who to a great extent have brought about the prosperity of the colony by going away into these far-back districts and developing them, and I think on that account greater consideration might be given to them. Still, that may be done later on. The honourable member for Riccarton thought it would increase our educa- tion expenditure enormously if this were to be done. But I might point out that these schools increase very slowly, and I think a great deal more consideration might justly be given them -equal pay for equal work. I was on a Com- mittee of which the member for Ashley is Chairman. I think seven or eight lady wit- nesses were examined while I was there, and they all gave their evidence in a most intelli- gent way, and, with the exception of one, they were all opposed to equal pay for equal work. They stated they did intend to make a life- study of teaching, and those who expected to get married and have a home did not want equal pay for equal work ; so that their evidence showed clearly they did not disapprove of the Bill. There was one lady there who seemed to be very talkative, and in her qualifications she seemed to me to be more fitted for the legal pro- fession. If some of the legal gentlemen in this House had to deal with her I am sure they would have to take a back seat. At any rate, the evidence of these witnesses showed clearly to me they were satisfied. My own opinion, on speaking privately to them, was that they were under the impression it was to be equal pay for Mr. Witheford chance of getting married to a teacher would she take equal pay for equal work. She did not think so; neither did I. In most cases the men will be the bread-winners. The honour- able member for Lyttelton made some com- parison between the North and the South Islands as to the salaries that would be paid, and he said the salaries now were much higher in Otago than in other parts of the colony. Probably that is because in the North Island there are a greater number of small schools, and of course that would affect the percentage. As far as I understand it, the scale of payments is in accordance with the number of scholars, and the scale in the North Island and in the South Island is the same; but in the North Island the average is the smaller because of the larger proportion of small schools. I 11.30. think, taking the Bill as a whole, it will be a great improvement on what we have. If it cuts some salaries down it brings others up and makes them more equal. I hope that some time these outlying districts will get more consideration, but under the present circum- stances the Bill is as near perfect as we can get one. I think the members of the Commission deserve credit for the amount of trouble they have taken over this matter. The member for Ashley thinks that teachers of a higher grade might have been appointed to the Commission, but I think that with them the Commission might not have been very much better off. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) .- I have only a few words to say in regard to this Bill. I attach no importance to the objection raised by some honourable members who sit on my right in regard to the allowance of £1 a day paid to the Commissioners to pay all their expenses except their travelling-expenses ; but I do object to the setting-up of the Commission, on the ground that it is an abrogation-a renun- ciation-of the functions of the Government, who ought themselves to have decided upon a scale of payment without setting up a Commis- sion. Clearly the Government themselves at first conceived it to be their duty to prepare a colonial scale of salaries, for they submitted a proposal to the Education Boards of the country which the Education Boards unanimously re- jected, with the result that the Government was forced to set up a Commission. I attribute that to a want of strength in the administra- tion of the Education Department. I have frequently commented on this point. The department, as it at present exists, is merely drifting : it has no direction. Its adminis- tration is as feeble and uncertain as water poured on a level surface. I say nothing now as to the increasing cost of the system, for this is not the time to do so, although the cost is increasing in a very appreciable degree. But the subject of cost was referred to by the honourable member for Riccarton, who put the view that the education system was be- coming costly because it had to follow the settler into the back blocks-to follow people who went into distant and sometimes inacces- sible parts of the country in order to secure 
<page>625</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=665</url>
that view, I have known an Education Board to be so manipulated as to become the tool of land speculators, or a land speculator, for a school was erected in a suburb of one of the principal cities of this colony where there was literally and absolutely no population at all, so that the speculator who was cutting up his land might be able to announce in the auctioneer's advertisement that there was a school in the district. The cost of the edu- cation system, which was formerly thought to be enormous, was in the year 1890 £373,764; it is now, ten years after, £512,519, or an in- crease of £138,755. It is natural, of course, that the cost should be increased to keep pace with the increasing population; but I hold now, as I always have held, that, while it is the fact that we have members in this House, and very many people outside this House, who tell us that their admiration for the system is so great that they care not what its cost may be, yet it is possible, by able and skilful administration, to keep the cost within reasonable limits without in the least degree impairing the efficiency of the system. But in discussing this Bill we are not concerned with the question of cost. I am glad the Bill is introduced. I hope it may become law, for the purpose of insuring that there shall be a uniform system of payment for the same class of intellect, the same teaching-power, in what- ever part of the colony the teacher may live. In the past it has been strongly and justly urged against the system that in the poorer districts of the colony the teachers were starved, while in the richer districts the teachers were well and amply paid. That is not the fault of the Boards ; it is the fault of   the system. The annual contributions from the Consolidated Fund to the Education Boards are distributed upon the population basis. Thus the wealthy districts become wealthier, and the poorer districts become poorer. This Bill will initiate a desirable change. The edu- cational grants ought, instead, to be distributed in accordance with the actual educational needs of each district. And so the gentlemen who formed this Education Commission have dis- covered the inequality that some teachers of merit were receiving very small salaries, while others of only equal merit were receiving much higher salaries. That state of things will be rectified. The member for Ashley refers with great satisfaction to the fact that the report of the Commission does not touch the question of the continued existence or otherwise of the Education Boards. I am not surprised that the Commission has not thought fit to touch this question. It is a question the Commis- sion dare not touch. No Commission-no Go- vernment-dare touch it. And yet, although no Commission or no Government has the courage to approach that question of the abolition of the Education Boards, there are, or there were, a majority of the School Inspectors of the colony in favour of the abolition of the Boards, notwithstanding the fact that they are paid their salaries by the Education Boards. abolished. Mr. FISHER .-- Yes, I am aware of that. Now, may I say, with the kind permission of the honourable member for Waihemo, that I have received many letters from teachers, from Inspectors, and from educational institutes, con- gratulating me on my efforts to abolish the Education Boards. Sir, I look with satisfaction on the Bill, for the reason that it will place all teachers on an equal footing-that merit will receive its due and proper recognition, regardless of the financial necessities, or the whimsicalities, of the Boards by whom they may happen to be employed. I need not touch the question of the difference in payment of female and male teachers. I have my own opinion on the point. I know the female teacher is as necessary and as valuable in her particular sphere in the education of the youth of the colony as the male teacher, but I differ from those who say they ought to be placed in point of salary on an equal status, for their functions, I hold, are not the same, nor aro their conditions of life. I have not read the evidence given be- fore the Commission upon this point-in fact, I have not read any of the evidence, for my time has been very much occupied through- out the session ; but I understand this point well enough to enable me to express an opinion with- out reading the evidence. There is a provision in one clause of the Bill to which I always had a strong objection. It is contained in clause 9, which relates to the extension of the staffs and the teaching in the district high schools. The clause is not a long one. I will read it,- "Notwithstanding anything in this Act, it shall be lawful for any Board, with the sanction of the Minister, to make such additions to the staff of any district high school, and to pay such additional sums as salaries to such staff, as may be prescribed by regulations, such payment to be made out of moneys appropriated by the General Assembly for that purpose, and distri- buted to the Boards in accordance with such regulations." I hold that parents who desire to give their children higher education should pay for that higher education. That idea is not new or original. It is a cardinal feature of the Educa- tion Act of 1877. I go further. I say that those children who are in the Seventh Standard, and who have no right to be there -for there is no such thing as a Seventh Standard-ought to pay for the educational advantages they receive at the cost of other children attending the school. They monopo- lize the attention and the teaching-talent of the teachers, and other parts of the school must suffer in consequence. Section 56 of the original Act of 1877 says this in regard to high schools :- " Every such district high school shall be under the charge of a headmaster, and such number of duly qualified masters and assistants as the Board shall from time to time consider necessary. "All the branches of a liberal education, comprising Latin and Greek classics, French and 
<page>626</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=666</url>
such other branches of science as the advanco- ment of the colony and the increase of the population may from time to time require, may be taught in such school. For such higher education fees shall be paid by the pupils at such rates as shall be fixed by regulations." The Act says they shall pay fees. Then, why should they not pay? I proposed at a former time in this Parliament-it was a time of great necessity, no doubt-that the so-called Seventh Standard, which in reality has no legal existence, should be abolished. The necessity for the abolition of that standard is not now so great, and consequently my objection is not so great : but I do object to the extension of the district-high-school system for the benefit of those people in the middle class of life who can well afford to pay, if they desire their children should receive a higher-class education. The common-school system was designed for the education of the children of all classes of the community ; its chief merit was that there should be no special advantage extended to any one class of the community : and it must be clear to the mind of any reasonable-any reason- ing person- that this is a provision conferring exclusive benefit on the children of a certain class of society. The original Education Act of 1877 was an equaliser - not a leveller, but an equaliser-in all respects. It was never intended that the children of any section of the community should have any advantage over those of any other class. It is clear that the extension of the district-high-school system is  designed for the benefit of a particular class of the community, who, by reason of the means they possess, are not entitled to receive such advantage. I look upon this Bill as only one step in the direction in which I have always wished the education system to go. Even if it is not perfect it will be easy in future sessions to make it so. I would point out, en passant, that those persons who regard the Education Act of 1877 as a sacred thing, never to be touched by the desecrating hand of man-as a fetish which it ought to be beyond the power of the Legislature to remodel or improve-take a mistaken view of the education question. Here is an attempt-and a laudable attempt- to improve the Act of 1877, and I regard any man as a friend of the Education Act who attempts in any way to improve the provisions of that Act. As I said before, I have not much to say in regard to the Bill. It is a short Bill aiming at the accomplishment of one purpose. That purpose being to my mind desirable, the Bill will have my support. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) .- I totally dis- agree with the remark of the last speaker in respect to centralising the education system. We have experience in this House of the diffi- culty of moving the central authorities in the direction we believe the country desires them to be moved, and it is only through our local institutions we can have the desires of the pub- lic readily given effect to. If the power is in the hands of the central authorities, every one must recognise that it is most difficult to move Mr. Fisher should like to refer to. It has been stated that women are incapable of performing this work, and that has been advanced as a reason why women should not be paid equal to men for equal work. This is not the real reason ; it is only an excuse-I cannot apply another term. But the real object is that certain prizes are to be reserved for men in order to induce them to take up the teaching profession, and hold these positions. If a woman takes charge of a class of the Fourth Standard of eighty children, and the result is satisfactory to the Inspector, is not that sufficient evidence that she is doing her work ? And the reports of the Inspectors are to the effect that the women teachers are doing the work satisfactorily. I may point out that women now hold the positions of heads of girls' high schools, and have charge of a large number of scholars, in many cases of high educational attainment. That being so, why should not a woman be allowed to take the position of head of a primary school, and the Education Board have the opportunity of giving her the same salary as would be paid to a man? The excuse given is this: that wo- men are not physically capable of performing the work. We have, however, evidence of cases of women who have been teaching for from eleven up to twenty years, and they are teaching the Fourth and Fifth Standards. The honourable member for Wallace knows that there is a considerable amount of work in teaching children of the Fourth Standard-and a class of perhaps eighty children. If a woman fills that position satisfactorily, why should you not give her the same pay as you would give a man ? Then, there is another excuse ad- vanced - namely, that women have not the same economical obligations or the same respon- sibilities; but I may point out that a woman may be supporting a mother, and other mem- bers of her family. You give the same rate of pay for men and women up to the third column of this scale, but in the other two columns you do not give the same rate of pay, showing clearly that this is merely an empty excuse, and that there is no sound reason for it. I would ask why should not the Education Boards be allowed to give payment at the same rate of pay as they give men for doing the same work. The purpose in fixing up this scale is in order that prizes may be held out for men to enter the teaching profession. That is the long and short of the whole thing. With regard to in- fant mistresses, they may have charge of three or four hundred children, and may be filling very responsible positions. You give a woman teacher $155 for performing this important work and filling this important position, and to the third male teacher you give an equal amount. You give the same amount to an infant mis- tress when there is a school of a total number of 560 to 600. Then, with regard to house allowance : House-allowance varies from #20 to $50 for the headmaster : but what about the first assistant teacher in the towns ? There is no house allowance granted to him. I have a case in my mind now where the difference will 
<page>627</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=667</url>
£375 clear, and the chief assistant teacher would get only £176 clear. An Hon. MEMBER .- What does he pay in rent ? Mr. ELL .- You cannot get a decent home to which a teacher would care to take his family under $50 a year-at any rate, in this city. Mr. GILFEDDER .- He has $200 left. He gets $250 according to the scale. Mr. ELL .- Well, even then, there is too great a difference altogether. The honourable member \`for Wallace knows that the first as- sistant teacher has a great many responsibi- lities and a great deal of very hard work to perform, because he has to take the place of the headmaster when the headmaster happens to be away. I think there ought to be house allowance for the first assistant teacher. Then, again, the difference between the first assistant teacher and the second assistant teacher is too great, and there ought to be some improvement in the pay for the second assistant teacher. I do not desire to detain the House any longer, as I only wished to emphasize the few points I have raised. As to the necessity for a colonial scale, that has been generally agreed upon not only by members of the House, but by the teachers themselves, and by the people of the country generally. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) .- I should like to say a word or two upon this Bill-not that I feel myself to be an expert in educational matters, though I did spend a few years upon the Board of Education in Auckland. I have  much sympathy with the desire that has been expressed by the teachers of the colony for a colonial scale with equal pay for similar posi- tions, to be brought into operation from one #cc-zero end of the colony to the other. I heartily con- cur with that. I have received a large number of communications showing the different feel- ings which this proposed Bill and the report of the Commissioners have introduced to the teach- ing community of the colony. I have had some telegraphing to me to support the Bill, " By all means try and get the scale pushed on." Others, again, say they are most anxious about it. One teacher in a high position assures me it is the coping-stone to the education system of New Zealand. Now, that is a very nice term indeed, and no doubt very alluring, and suggestive of a monumental structure ; but I have received a number of communications from teachers in charge of schools in back-block districts, both men and women, expressing great dissatisfac- tion with the proposition, and at the inatten- tion that is shown to their interests. I am satisfied that their complaints are reasonable, and that a system leaving some hundreds of teachers and thousands of children shamefully disparaged scarcely deserves the finish of a coping-stone ; nor yet does this Bill provide it. I must confess I feel a great deal of sympathy for the indignation that has reached me on this matter, and am actually in doubt as to what is best to do. I know something about the diffi- culties of back-block teachers, and, also, I have . this feeling : that one of the most important in- concerned, is to look after the children in the country, and particularly in out-of the-way places. Perhaps I am somewhat jealous of country interests. I believe that the tendency of populated, well-served centres is to make the country people merely the hewers of wood and drawers of water. There is this I should like to place before the attention of the House-and it seems to have been altogether overlooked by the Commission: that the teacher with twenty- five or thirty children and no assistant is the hardest-worked of all the teaching staffs. I would much sooner, if I were a teacher, take seventy or eighty children in a big city school, because they would be before me with an equal or an average inceptivity of mental capacity, and my effort to instruct would be as readily appreciated by eighty in the big school-and would not be half the trouble nor nearly the strain upon me as a teacher-as if I took a country school with five or six grades, to each of which I felt I was under an obligation to do justice, and at the same time felt myself in- capable of doing it within the allotted period of school hours. Now, there seems to be no special provision for this. I have also this other feeling : that, if there were any schools more than others where I would be anxious to place the very best teaching talent and to pay them well for their services, it would be in our country schools. And then there is this disadvantage that the country teachers are labouring under which has been overlooked by this Commission : The teachers in or near the cities on Saturdays can make the very best of that day for recuperation, either by physical or intellectual recreation : they have opportunities for doing so ; but the poor teacher in the back blocks has simply to "mope," if I may use the expression, on the Saturday, and does not receive the advantages which in his professional aspirations he feels he would like to have. He has scant oppor- tunity with which to improve himself, and he is labouring in every respect under disadvan- tages that do not come to the higher-paid teachers in our cities. Therefore, instead of placing, as some teachers have remarked, " the wasters." or inferior teachers, in the country districts, I think it is the duty of those who feel an earnest concern for the educational results of the national system of New Zea- land to place the very best teachers in the country districts. My opinion is that schools of twenty, or thirty, or thirty - five child- ren in the country should have capable teachers, so as to provide teaching-talent for the future, by bringing on aspiring pupil- teachers who may deem the profession an attractive outlet to their aspirations for better- ment; and I think country children in some respects the best material for teachers. It is therefore incumbent in this class of school that the very best masters should be there, in order to furnish them with qualifications and suitable instruction for that purpose. Nothing has been mentioned, I notice, about the fact that head-teachers receiving the highest salaries in our city schools are under no obligation to 
<page>628</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=668</url>
them to the first assistant, who receives no special remuneration for rendering such ser- vices to the State, and in time may come to feel that he is under no obligation to do so, and It the pupil-teachers may suffer injustice. seems to me as if nothing but mediocrity had place, and as if these Commissioners-these specially selected men-had abandoned them- selves to downright selfishness, indifference, and unconcern for the educational welfare of the country, or their sole concern had been to secure complementary remuneration for those teachers who necessarily had better advantages than those in the country. Just imagine teachers in our small schools feeling that perhaps they will get a salary of #40, or $50, or $60! The teachers in such positions will suffer an unceasing fret to be removed. This is an absurd rate of remuneration to give to teachers upon whom such important interests devolve ; in fact, who can overestimate the grave responsibilities of the work of the teachers in our small country schools? Then, again, there is another matter that has been already men- tioned, and that is what might be termed the selfish Toryism which has been put forth by this Commission, who, I believe, call them- selves "Liberals," and I assume they were selected because they were supposed to be the best men, and possessing suitable qualifications for dealing with the subject. And what have they done ? They have not only fixed a scale of what I might term a system of invidious salaries for the teachers in the cities, but they have also decreed that teachers in the large schools, although their literary qualifications may be of the lowest possible grade, may be en- titled to the best positions. It is a matter of perfect indifference, if we take the report of the Commission, as to what literary status the teachers in the city schools may have. If I may be only allowed to use ingenuous language, it seems to me as if the Commis- sioners would prefer that the scholarly attain- ments and status of the educational staff of New Zealand should not be such as to suggest any reflection upon the literary level of the Commissioners themselves. Now, I think that is a very serious reflection upon the care that is now practised in Europe in training young people for the teaching profes- sion. I think experience has verified that the higher the scholarly status of the teacher, and the higher his standard of qualification, the more fitted he is to impart instruction. No matter what the subject in which I might desire to be taught, let me have the thorough master for my teacher. I should make faster progress by reason of the superior qualifications which he possesses, for, as a rule, the man with the higher culture is better able to impart instruction than those who are only moderate in their scholarly attainments. I do not intend to suggest that there may not be some instances of teachers of a comparatively low-grade certificate, and who may even have tried to secure higher qualifica- tion than that which they possess, and yet at the same time such teachers may be better able mir. Monk tion to their classes than others who have gone through a university course. But these are the exception, and not the rule. They are teachers who possess a special aptitude or proclivity for teaching. But, as I say, they are the exception, born with the gift, and should not be taken as a criterion. The report of the Commission suggests a desire to ignore the rule that the higher the attainments the better will be the teacher, and that we should encourage our young teachers to acquire the highest culture that effort will impart. Though 1 with much reluctance, I shall support this Bill, ! because it is a movement in the right direction, but a poor return for the £6,000 the Commis- sion has cost. And I fear there will be intense dissatisfaction in the country-and, in fact, there must be. And I do not know whether the passing of the Bill this session may not be to the disadvantage of securing that consideration for the small or back-blocks schools which I desire they should have, because I think that when this Act is passed it may most likely fix the remuneration these teachers will re- : ceive for a considerable time to come. Then, 1 again, with regard to equality of pay for male and female teachers, of course, logically considered, there ought to be no difference. But I will ask, is it possible to secure a rule 1 which will apply to all? Whilst there are women who have proved themselves equal to do anything that has been attained by men in literary and various professional departments, yet is it not a fact that, as a rule, they are not able to accomplish or bear the same strain as men ? They have not the physical quality to bear the strain that men can endure, and yet as teachers it is more than I can do to define the line which shall fixedly mark them inferior to men, or give a reason why in those instances, when the work is done as well as can be done by men they should not have the same pay. There is this difficulty : We may take the whole teaching-staff of New Zealand-that is, the males-and there is no doubt that under this colonial scale each will receive the same pay for the same position ; but will they be equal, for there are many teachers who will be worth more money as compared with the teach- ing done by others, but the pay will be alike? Is there any profession in which it is more diffi- cult to secure ideal servants ? The same applies elsewhere. Take Britain itself. How many Dr. Arnolds have they produced there? Yet we know that few men have produced more striking results by their teaching than were produced by Arnold upon even the political and the moral status of Great Britain. The young men turned out from his school became, many of them, public servants occupying eminent positions, and owed, I believe, their high moral quality and the sense of duty which they practised all through their lives very much to the ideal teaching that they received from that celebrated master. I know, and I dare say every honourable member knows, of teachers who are actuated by loyalty to their duties and the moral responsibilities of 
<page>629</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=669</url>
with a conscientious feeling of the responsi- bility intrusted to them, and to make their pupils feel that they are only supplying them with the instruments-the key, so to speak-by which they should go on studying for the rest of their lives, and increasing the store of their individual knowledge for the social elevation of our commonwealth. How many teachers are there that feel baffled, leaving them no time for moral teaching, because of the cram- ming system which is forced upon them, and consequently necessarily foregoing what may be held to be the truer functions of the teaching service ! Can the thinkers and reasoners of New Zealand now claim that we have the cul- tured status and intelligence in the country which we expected would result when our education system was introduced? No doubt the Premier will say I am introducing poli- tics into this matter, but I say there is a want of political or social knowledge, taking the average people of New Zealand at the present time. I dare say the Premier would prefer this to be the case, and does not want them to be truly instructed, and to have that degree of perception which would enable them to grasp the true meaning and results of what falls from his lips. I consider the political conceptions now dominant in the people of New Zealand are not conducive to the ultimate wel- fare of this colony, and are not to the credit of a system that has produced no better results. I think we are altogether indifferent to the re-  sponsibility of debt ; we are wasteful in ex- penditure of public money and other matters of that nature : and it should be in the province of the teachers of New Zealand to turn out the young people so that they will have a con- ception of the true principles of economic science. At the age of twenty-one, by reason of the universal franchise, they are potentially the rulers of our country, and are responsible for the character of its Government. I did not intend to speak on this Bill, and my remarks no doubt have been somewhat crude, but I have given expression to the conceptions which I had that the aspiration of this thing is right. The work of the Commissioners, though costly, has been very defective, and will not give satis- faction ; and, if we pass this Bill this session, possibly it may only perpetuate for too long a period what I consider will be a disas- trous influence on our country schools, and inflict a further injury in the future. If I were Premier I will tell you what I would do. I would insist on that Liberal maxim of which I have heard him say so much-that there should be a living-wage-and I would not have any teacher employed except at such re- muneration as would naturally lead him to feel an interest in his avocation. Then, another matter with regard to the country - I think every young man should have inducement to be married. I consider it would be far better if the teachers in the country schools, with their twenty or thirty pupils-some of them grown- up girls-were married men. If the salary is too low to enable a young man to satisfactorily life, there should be a special allowance up to a fixed maximum made to teachers in the country to enable them to be married. The city schools are able to look after themselves -their number and influence will secure them all they require ; but the attention of the states- man should be given to seeing that the country schools receive the best possible education suitable to their requirements. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston). - Sir, I quite recognise at this stage of the session that anything in the shape of a long dissertation . on educational matters is out of place, but I cannot let a measure of this sort pass its second reading without pointing out what, I think, are several defects in it. I am sorry the Govern- ment have taken the report of the Commission, as it were, holus-bolus, without exercising any discretion whatever about the details, because the Bill as laid before us differs from the opin- ions expressed hy Ministers only last session, more particularly with regard to the pay of women teachers. Last session Ministers said that one of the principles of the classification of teachers' salaries would be to put women on the same basis as men, and the Education Department carried this to such an extent that they had refused to assent to any regulations in regard to certain teachers unless the same rate of pay was given to female teachers as was given to males. Yet in the mea- sure before us this principle has been abro- gated. Now, in regard to the pay of women teachers, I say that if women are not suited for certain positions, then the Education Boards will take very great care they are not appointed ; but it is ridiculous to say that, be- cause many women are not suited to those positions, particularly gifted women, who are specially fitted for the very highest positions in educational circles, should not be paid the same as men. There can be no question about it that this Bill does not attempt to deal with many of the most difficult problems in our educational system in regard to the position of teachers. For instance, there is no other em- ployment in the colony in which the pay of those who are doing the work is based on such a bad system as the pay of school-teachers. If the employés in the Railway Department had their salaries based on the amount of work they did in a day, if the employés in the Postal Department had their salaries based on the number of telegrams which passed through their hands during the day, or if the salaries of the men in the Government Printing Office -which is also classified -were based on the amount of type each man set in a day, one could understand something of the principle which has been adopted in regard to the payment of teachers-the most capable class in the employ of the State. But there is nothing of the sort. Men are usually paid according to their abilities, according to the work they can do if the work is put to them, and there is no suggestion of increasing or decreasing the pay of any- body else in the Government service because of the variation in the volume of their work. 
<page>630</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=670</url>
epidemic of measles, or something of that sort, in a district will actually decrease the pay of teachers in a school, and we have in the measure before us an instance where a decrease of one in the average attendance will make a difference to the salary of one teacher of $75 a year ; and yet that is the scale the Government have seriously adopted as the acme of perfection in regard to the payment of teachers. It is not as if the problem were a difficult one to solve if it were approached in a thorough manner ; and . for that reason I cannot understand why the Government have not done something to solve the question of decrease in payment through intermittent attendance at many of the schools due to causes beyond the control of teachers or Committees. 1 have made a suggestion over and over again which I think to a great extent would meet the difficulty of giving teachers less than a living - wage. If, instead of paying teachers on the average attendance, they were paid half on the number of the efficient roll and half on the average attendance, then there would be something in the nature of a cer- tainty for the teacher's salary, and also an in- centive for the teacher to work up the school so as to increase the salary beyond what the certainty is. Another matter that has not been dealt with in the Bill, and which shows how carelessly the Government have dealt with the matter, is the question of the transfer of teachers from one school to another. It is the theory of the Education Act-but, unfortu- nately, it is not carried out-that Education Boards have the right to transfer a teacher who is found unfitted to take charge of a large school, but who would probably do good work in a small school, from one school to another. That is the theory ; but, unfortunately, it can- not be carried into effect, because, besides the Education Board, the consent of the teachers and of the Committee have to be got. I believe it is necessary, where you fix the scale of sala- ries under this Bill, that that power of transfer should be given to the Education Boards. Unless they have it you will find your system of classified school salaries will work very much worse than the present system. Then, we were told last year that the new scale of salaries would enable a larger allowance to be given to School Committees for incidental work ; but there is no such proposal in the Bill. In fact, under its proposals the Education Boards will have less to give in the shape of allowances to Committees than they have had in the past, and for this reason-I particularly allude to the Education Board I have had some connection with in the Wanganui District : We are paying something like #1,000 a year for relieving teachers, for which no allowance has been made in the Bill, and which will have to be paid out of the 11s. 3d. capitation allowance to the Education Board. If teachers were made of cast-iron this might do, but they allow under the scale only for one teacher in each position in a school. All teachers have to get sick-leave at some time, and unless something is done in many cases schools will be closed for months at Mr. Pirani vided in this measure funds by which Educa- tion Boards can provide relieving - teachers. During the last six months in the Wanganui Education District the sick-leave has amounted to close upon 10 per cent. of the total service. And yet this matter has been altogether over- looked by the Government. Then, there is the question of house allowance. The Board is compelled to pay house allowance, but there is no provision for the amount to be given to the Boards ; it is left to the will of the Minister. Unfortunately, I was not here when the Premier made his speech in introducing the Bill, but I understand he did not state that the Govern- ment intended to place a sum on the estimates to give effect to the clause which compels the Board to pay house allowance. He said the allowance could be paid out of the Building Fund ; but every one connected with education knows that the Building Fund is not half as much as it ought to be, and how are you going to pay out of that fund the large amount-which in our district amounts to $700 a year-for house allowance ? Then, another question not dealt with in this Bill, and one which involves extra expense in our. district, is that of the instruction of pupil- teachers. It is all very well to say that the head- teachers ought to give instruction without extra payment, but under the arbitration awards em- ployes are not allowed to work overtime without not only ordinary pay, but time and a quarter or time and a half. Yet here the most highly educated servants the State have are expected to work overtime without extra pay. There are no sinews of war provided for the instruc- tion of pupil-teachers, and, if they have to depend merely on a vote on the estimates for the establishment of schools of instruction at the will of the Ministry, when bad times come the grant will be cut off. Another feature of the Bill which I think is a bad one is this : Under the present Act a fixed capitation has to be paid to Education Boards. Under this Bill there is no such thing except in regard to 11s. 3d. capitation for incidental expenses. Another feature which I think is a wrong one is the basis of payment of house allowance to teachers. : No matter what the size of a teacher's family, his house allowance is regulated by the size of his school ; and I could name several cases where, for instance, a teacher who is single would get a large house allowance, while a married man with a family would only get £20. I say the question of house allowance should be based more on the necessity of the family than on the number of students the man teaches. I regret that the Government have 1 not dealt with this matter in a more compre- \--- - - hensive way, and that they have accepted entirely the conclusions of the Royal Commis- sion. This is the first time, I think, they have accepted the conclusions of a Royal Commis- sion on any question. In the case of the tariff ! they ignored the conclusions of the Tariff Com- mission, and allowed them to go by the board. 1 In this case they seem to have sheltered them- selves behind the Commission, and we have a scale drawn up in accordance with instruc- 
<page>631</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=671</url>
a single member of the Commission say much in favour of it as compared with the higher scale. I remember, when the report of the Commission came before the House, the Premier said that, for the sake of the 2s. 6d. extra capitation, he would not dream of spoil- ing the scale of teachers' salaries, and yet he now proposes to do so. Of course, in measures of this sort the powers of the House are re- stricted through the impossibility of increasing salaries without a message from the Governor. I hope that at some future date the hedging round of the privileges of the Crown in this way, which have come down from old "musty, fusty " precedents, which the Premier is so fond of condemning, will be altered, and that mem- bers will be able to exercise their powers freely in amending such a Bill. Personally, I have always been in favour of a colonial scale of teachers' salaries, and I regret that, when such a scale is seriously proposed, it is not a better one than that now before us. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) .- I had no intention of saying a single word in dis- paragement of the work done by the Com- mission, but, with one or two other speakers, I am bound to confess that I think the Education Department ought to have been able to provide us with a colonial scale of salaries without the information contained in the report of the Commission. Indeed, I doubt whether any real information has been adduced as the result of the work of the Commission which could not have been obtained without it. I am sorry that the  Chairman of the Commission, in his speech to- night, did not give us succinctly some state- ment of the particular information which led the Commission to adopt the scale which is embodied in this Bill. I have not the least doubt that this Bill will pass without even a vote being taken upon it. But I feel quite sure of this : that, whatever scale of salaries is passed at the present time, it is not likely to give satisfaction throughout the colony. But, even though we make an unsatisfactory start, perhaps it is well that we should make a start. I think a great deal of the discussion which has taken place to-night would have been obviated if the Chairman of the Commission had given us a statement of the principle on which this scale is based. There are only one or two points to which I wish to call attention, and I know there will be considerable dissatisfaction with respect to those points. In the first place, I regret that there is such a wide difference between the salaries of the assistant masters as compared with the salaries of the headmasters-not that I would like to see the headmasters' salaries dragged down. I see, of course, the difficulty that lies in the way. I recognise, with the honourable member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher), that the amount expended upon education has gone up very largely during recent years- as he points out, from $373,764 in 1890 to $512,519 in 1901. But, personally, I do not regret that increase, and if it were en- tircly devoted to increasing the efficiency of less occasion to regret it. But I feel that, in spite of that increase to which the honourable gentleman drew attention, the efficiency of education in the colony is no greater, and certainly the teachers of the colony are receiv- ing not one jot or tittle of advantage from that increased expenditure, and that is a regrettable point. But I am speaking of the disparity between the salaries paid to headmasters and assistant masters. Taking the large schools in the city centres, where a headmaster will re- ceive a salary of #374, the salary of the first assistant master will be $245, and that of the second assistant master £170. And note the vast difference between the salaries of the first and second assistant masters. A serious point about this difference is that very few of the assistant masters can ever hope to be- come the headmaster of a large school, and the great bulk of the real teaching of this colony is done by the assistant masters. Now, it is obvious that a salary of £170 is not likely to prove attractive. If we are to get the very best intellects-and we should get the best intellects to train our young people-we will not get them at £170 a year. There is absolutely no possibility of a young man seeing his way to settle down in life on a salary of £170, particularly when we remember that this is the salary attached to a school in a large city, where the teacher has to keep up a certain show of respectability, and where it is quite impossible for him to hope to maintain him- self and a family on such a salary. The chances of his becoming a first assistant master are remote, and the probability of his becoming a headmaster is infinitely remote, and he will have to remain for the best years of his life a second assistant master. This is no idlo argument, because we know how many of these teachers have been in this position for years, and how utterly hopeless the outlook is for them. I suppose, with the amount of money the colony can spend on education, it may be impossible to give such salaries to the assistant masters as we should like to see them have, but I do regret that there should be such a dis- parity between the salaries paid to the assistant masters and the headmasters as exists at the present time. The only other point is as to the difference between the male and the female teachers, and here I would draw attention again to the difference in the salaries as seen in the teachers of our large schools. Now, the head mistress in a large school receives $200 per annum, while the first assistant master receives £245. How does the argument of equal pay for equal work apply in that case? There is no doubt that the work of the head mistress is equally as heavy and equally as import- ant as that of the first assistant master, and yet the head mistress receives $200 and the first assistant master $245. Then, Sir, if we take suburban schools what do we find ? In the suburban schools the first assistant master and head mistress really divide the work be- tween them, and the teaching of the Fourth and Fifth Standards is really taken turn and 
<page>632</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=672</url>
assistant master, and yet-note again the dis- parity-the master gets £180 and the mistress £105. These are the salaries paid at present. But, Sir, the worst of it is that this disparity is still further accentuated in the scale now before the House. I am desirous of seeing the School Teachers' Salaries Bill passed, but I do wish that a scale could have been framed which would not show this wide disparity be- tween the male and female teachers of our city and suburban schools. The member for Wel- lington City (Mr. Fisher) said he could not agree with the theory of equal pay for females with male teachers, and he gave as his reason that the functions of the female teachers were not the same as the male teachers. But, Sir, I would draw his attention to this fact : that, so far as suburban schools, at any rate, are concerned, the first assistant master and the head mistress do identically the same work. An Hon. MEMBER .- And always do it as well. Mr. COLLINS .- Oh, there is absolutely no question that it is done as well by the female teachers as by the male teachers. At any rate, here is a case where the functions are identical, and exactly the same work is done. I do not wish to go largely into the question of equal pay for equal work; I simply wish to draw attention to this disparity, which is accentuated and intensified rather than minimised in the scale now before the House. Mr. FISHER .- Are there any female univer- sity professors ? Mr. COLLINS .- No; but there are females who ought to be university professors, and who would make much better professors than some of the male professors. But what I want to say is this : that I hope this Bill will not be regarded as final in this matter. I know we have to make a start, and it is something to get a School Teachers' Salaries Bill on the statute- book. It is something to put the whole position on a sounder foundation than it has been on in the past, and I quite agree with every- thing that has been said as to the necessity of giving a better status to the teachers of the colony than they hold and enjoy at pre- sent. But I do sincerely hope that the de- partment will not regard this as a final settle- ment of the matter. I wish to heaven we had a live Education Department. When I look back on the time when the Minister of Educa- tion was in this House-the Hon. Mr. Reeves- and a real, live, intelligent Minister of Educa- tion, and remember the way the department worked in those days, I cannot but regret that the department does not show an equal amount of intellectual activity in these days. It is true -paradoxical as it may seem-that in those days no attempt was made to give us a scale of salaries such as is now proposed, and to put the teaching staff on this footing. But I feel quite certain that the school-teachers will be more alive after this Bill is passed than before its passing as to the necessity of having that justice done to them to which they are entitled. I agree with every word that has been said as to the Mr. Collins of this colony, and if we are to have ! intelligent men and women in the future, such 1 men and women as this colony may be proud of, then it will largely depend upon the teach- ing staffs. I think the Premier, in his opening remarks, pointed out how, perhaps to a much greater extent in many cases, the future well- being of the children of this colony depended ! upon school-teachers rather than upon home 1 influences. Unfortunately, that is too true in very many cases. But, at any rate, if our child- 1 ren are to grow up men and women, and become fitted to fill to the full the duties of citizenship, then it is necessary we should have our teachers selected, intellectually speaking, from the very best, and we shall never get them until at least we are prepared to pay such emolument as the best deserve. Therefore I hope this will only be regarded as an instalment in the direction of bringing about that perfect state I desire to see in our Education Department. Mr. GILFEDDER (Wallace) .- I have only a word or two to say at this stage of the debate. I did not intend to speak, and would not have done so were it not in order to clear up a few points raised by previous speakers. With re- gard to the measure now before the House, it must be gratifying to the teaching profession in the colony to know that the Government have so cordially taken up the question of uni- form staffing and payment, and are determined to place on the statute-book a colonial scale for teachers. For years the teachers have been agitating for a colonial scale of salaries and for a uniform scheme of staffing. They found as years went on that there were great con- trasts between one district and another, for numerous anomalies existed, and the most difficult work the Commission had to do was to adopt a system of staffing that would be at once sufficient, efficient, and uniform through- out the length and breadth of the colony. Once that was done the path was clear for the allo- cation of the money that, so to speak, was placed at the disposal of the Commission, and \- to parcel it out amongst the different classes of teachers. It must be gratifying to the : Government, and also to the teachers, to find that this Bill has been so favourably received by the House. Nearly every speaker has pointed out individual cases in which teachers will suffer a slight reduction, or will not receive a sufficient increase, and nearly every one has advocated an increase of salary for one section or another of the teachers. This was also the great difficulty with which the Commission had to contend. We were \--- limited to a capitation allowance of £4. Con- sequently, although we would have liked in very many instances to recommend higher 1 salaries than those contained in the report, ! the money at our disposal was not sufficient to enable us to do so. With regard to the ques- tion of equal pay for equal work, I may say the lady teachers who appeared before the Com- 1 mission and gave evidence did not contend for equal pay for equal work. They did not advo- cate it; and the teachers of the larger schools, 1 
<page>633</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=673</url>
those of wide experience, all informed the Commission that, in their opinion, and as far as their experience extended, the female teachers were not equal to the work now required to be done in order to overtake the syllabus work for the Fifth and Sixth Stan- dards. The general impression obtained by the Commission after going round the various districts and hoaring the evidence of the female and male teachers was that there was no advo- cacy on the part of either males or females that there should be equal pay for equal work, but that the disparity that exists in the various edu- cational districts should be removed as far as pos- sible. The honourable member for Palmerston has advocated just now equal pay for equal work, and yet he is a member of the Wanganui Educa- tion Board, which, I consider, is the greatest offender in maintaining a wide disparity- namely, 25 per cent. as between the salaries paid to males and females. Again, with re- gard to sick-leave, the honourable member in- formed us that it cost the Wanganui Education Board #1,000 a year for the salaries of the re- lieving-teachers. That does not seem to agree with the evidence tendered to the Commission by the Chairman of the Board, Mr. Bridge. The questions and answers were :- " What provision have you in the way of salaries for sick-leave ?- Under the regulations teachers are not entitled to any salary for sick- leave. All applications come up at the Board's meeting, and we make an allowance not ex- ceeding one month in the year. " Did you deduct from the £445 received by relieving-teachers the amount you do not pay to teachers absent on sick-leave ?- I could not tell what that amounted to. The salary of the re-     lieving-teacher is charged to the school in which he or she is relieving. It would not be an im- . possibility, but it would be a great labour, to prepare a full statement. There cannot be much saving, because our teachers are not absent more than one month in the year as a rule." And, consequently, that objection, as far as the Wanganui district is concerned, will fall to the ground. I should just like, had I time, to quote a few remarks of witnesses who appeared before us, relative to the salaries of female teachers- namely, the Rev. P. B. Fraser, Mr. Mitchell, and Mr. Pryde (Secretary), of the Otago Edu- cation Board. These witnesses' evidence will be found on pages 168, 170, and 173 of the printed evidence. Then, at Wanganui Mr. Bridge, who is Chairman of the Board, and Dr. Smyth, the newly appointed Inspector, both said they were not in favour of equal pay for equal work. I will read an extract from the evidence of these gentlemen. Mr. Bridge says -the question is,- " Do you advocate that female teachers should get the same salary as males ?- No. " Do you consider that they should get the same up to a certain dimit ?- That is a very vague expression. Up to a certain limit I would say ' Yes,' but a male teacher, I think, requires a higher salary than a female. In most cases a male teacher takes up the profession as his life's work ; in many cases the female teacher takes it up until she goes out of the profession ; but even if she is not married a female teacher has only herself to support, whilst a male teacher has to support a wife and family." Dr. Smyth says in his evidence,- " With regard to the salaries paid to female teachers, do you consider that they should re- ceive the same remuneration as male teachers, provided they do their work as efficiently ?- No; I am opposed to equal payments. "On what grounds ?- It depends upon the principle you go upon. The question is whether the State should act on the principle of equal pay for equal work,. or, as it is called, equal pay for equal burdens. My contention is that the State should pay on the latter principle." In Wellington, Miss Myers and Miss Craig gave evidence on behalf of the female teachers in Wellington, and both said that the Welling- ton lady teachers do not press for equal pay for equal work ; and the reason why they should not receive the same remuneration as male teachers is well summed up by Mr. Bennett, of the Karori School, who states that they should not get the same pay for these reasons :- "In the first place, women are not demand- ing equal pay with men. I have asked many of our lady teachers, and do not find that they are demanding equal pay. Secondly, if a wo- man were paid the same salary as a man, keener competition would ensue, which must, in the long-run, result in the breakdown of the woman ; hence it would be cruel to place her in such a position. Thirdly, it is generally conceded that men have greater responsibilities than women. Fourthly, statistics prove that men adopt the profession as a life-work to a much greater extent than women. Fifthly, higher salaries for men are more likely to at- tract suitable boys into the profession. Sixthly, men do not break down so often as women. Seventhly, few women can control upper boys or mixed classes. Eighthly, a woman could not well take the place of the headmaster during his temporary absence. My last reason is that women teachers could not become heads of large mixed schools : married men are de- manded by parents. " You think that a woman can teach as efficiently as a man ?- In many cases." These are very cogently the reasons given by various witnesses, and summed up in his evi- dence by Mr. Bennett. It is not necessary to allude to the fact that in some of the education districts the Boards have been rather liberal in the establishment of small schools, and, conse- quently, they were unable to pay the salaries they would otherwise have been in a position to pay. That obtains in the case of the Marl- borough Board, and also in the case of the Auckland, and in drawing up this scale we endeavoured to harmonize the various methods in vogue at the present time. In only one or two instances will reduction be suffered, and the great mass of teachers throughout the colony will get substantial increases. Now, a great deal of complaint has been made by those teachers who will not get what they 
<page>634</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=674</url>
consider a proportionate increase to other teachers, and also by those who will get no increase at all, or who suffer a reduction ; whereas the great majority of teachers, who get a substantial increase, have simply maintained . silence. They have not come to the House and proclaimed their acceptance of the suggested scale : they do not appear; consequently the outside public, who do not belong to the teach- ing profession, may be under the impression that the scale does not give so much satisfac- tion as it really does. With regard to the small schools, they will suffer in Auckland, and to a small extent in Otago ; but it must be borne in mind there are about nine.hundred teachers in Auckland, and only a small percentage of them will suffer reduction. At present the Auckland Board does not give house allowance. There are 113 schools, with an average attendance of twenty, in connection with which there are no residences for the teachers ; but these teachers will now be paid house allowance, which will mean a substantial increase to their salaries. As has been pointed out by the member for Palmerston, after the Bill is passed, and a colonial scale is adopted, the £4 capitation will entirely disappear. Provision is also made to meet the case of side-schools. There will be a difficulty in regard to the mistress with the side- schools in Christchurch, but that will be a matter for the North Canterbury Education Board to arrange, and there is sufficient latitude allowed to Education Boards to adjust their staffs so as to meet the provisions of this Bill. The main idea in arranging the scale was, in the first place, to adapt it as far as possible to the varying schemes throughout the education districts of the colony ; and, in the second place, not to prejudicially affect any of the occupants of the positions they now hold. Therefore, any of those who will be seriously affected-and they will be but few-will have two years in which to arrange with their Board for pro. motion or for transfers to other schools or other districts. With regard to the second assistants, I have to say that in a few instances they will suffer ; but, as honourable members will see in a footnote to the suggested colonial scale, there is a provision under which a Board, instead of appointing an extra pupil- teacher, may increase the salary of the assistant-teacher who will be prejudicially affected to the extent of £45. As far as the instruction of pupil - teachers is concerned, honourable members will realise the fact that in some of the education districts a subsidy is now paid to headmasters for the instruction of pupil-teachers. In other districts that is not so, and it is proposed now to abolish that pay- ment. Then, there is this point : a pupil- teacher does not come in until the average at- tendance reaches ninety. Hitherto the pupil- teacher was the first addition to the staff, whether at thirty-five, forty, or fifty, as the case might be; consequently, in schools of under fifty, there are now to be found a head master and a pupil-teacher, and it is the duty of the headmaster to instruct the pupil-teacher, for which he will receive payment. When the Mr. Gilfedder attendance gets up to ninety he will be re- ceiving a very good salary himself, and will be expected to instruct the pupil-teacher without With these few re- further remuneration. marks I will reserve other subjects I wish to deal with until the Bill gets into Committee. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- Sir, I desire to express my very great pleasure at the manner 1 in which the Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill has been received by honourable members. The promotion of this measure has been to me a labour of love, and members will realise that when I state that both my parents were school-teachers in the Mother-country. There, as here, the responsibility and labour was great, the emolument niggardly in the extreme ; in fact, worse than in this colony. 1.0. Taking the payment of teachers in the colony now, I say that, considering the respon- sibility that is cast upon them, considering the training they themselves have to undergo to fit them for the position, and knowing, as I do, how conscientiously and well they perform their duties, to me it has always been painful to know that the emoluments received have been so small. I therefore say that to remove that reproach is a labour of love, and I am glad to have had the opportunity of bringing down a measure giving fixture of salary, and at the same time increasing the salaries of the teachers. Although scale No. 1 is now the scale adopted, as I said earlier in the session, and I again repeat, what the Government have in view is that there shall be an increase in the amount paid. I do not say it shall be in accordance with scale No. 2 as submitted by the Commission. I hold myself that, even under the Bill as it stands now, even with scale No. 2, there are certain anomalies respect- ing the salaries of assistants in mixed schools, as compared with the higher salaries paid to assistant teachers in separate schools, that re- quire to be removed. But we have now, as between the cost to the colony of No. 1 and No. 2 scales, a difference of £10,800, and what I 1 have said is that I think the colony can afford 1 later on to give that £10,800. We shall have the experience of the working of the Bill when it is passed, and we shall be able to see how best to distribute that £10,000. I may say at once . that I contended last session, and I contend now, that in some of the larger schools- in some of the schools in the more favoured dis- tricts- the amount received and that will be received under this Bill, whilst not at all too high, yet it is high when compared with what it is proposed to pay to teachers in the country schools in scattered districts. It is in . the smaller schools of the colony that I think an increase should be made, and that is where I should be quite prepared to give a more liberal allowance out of the £10,000 which is available. We may also, probably, in the working of the system, see our way to improve the position of some of our female teachers. These are matters which we must take into 1 consideration. Now, coming to the statements made as regards the small schools, as members will see, the heading "20" is slightly mis- 
<page>635</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=675</url>
leading. It should, of course, have been "From 1 to 20," and then members would have understood that it is to schools up to twenty that the £100 applies. That, of course, is intended as a capitation of £5 per head. Some members, in dealing with this phase of the question, have said there is no minimum. Well, there is nothing to prevent the Boards themselves fixing a minimum and fixing also that there shall be a contribution by the parents so as to augment the amount provided by the State. Mr. MONK .- That would never do. Mr. SEDDON .- That is done at the present time. I may say there may be a danger ; but it is safeguarded, I think, and some Education Boards in this respect have, I think, gone too far. I know that in the Marlborough District, the Auckland District, and even in the West- land District, the state of things disclosed in the evidence shows the Boards have gone too far in dealing with the matter. However, I will deal with that more in detail later on. Then, I come to the exception taken because there were no ladies on the Commission. I do not myself disparage that suggestion ; but the fact is I question very much whether women, to deal with questions affecting women, would be the wisest thing. However, I may say the amounts we have decided upon, upon which the estimated cost has been appraised, are based upon the average of the last three years. The average expenditure of the Boards has been £62,150. Now, the member for Pal- merston and other members have stated that we have made special provision for the Boards in respect to their expenditure. I have no desire whatever to suggest for a moment that the Boards have not been economical in their working; but I do know that they have been occasionally extravagant in their administra- tion, and I also know that the teachers have felt this, and that is to a great extent why they hail this Bill with joy. Whenever the Boards have got into difficulties there have been amended regulations reducing the teachers' salaries, and the unfortunate teachers have been the sufferers. This Bill prevents any- thing of that kind, and I am satisfied, with this responsibility taken from the Boards, the Boards can conscientiously effect savings. In connection with the question of transfers, I think there is only one case I know of where the moneys from general account have been transferred to the building account. Strange to say, an application was made to transfer the moneys back to the general account, but the Auditor-General stepped in and said the law would not admit it. We have been told by one or two members that the department is drifting, that it has no head, and ultimately, I presume, they wish us to infer that chaos will reign supreme. That is incorrect ; but the honourable member for Wel- lington City was Minister of Education, and it might be said that the Minister of Education should be in this House. I ask the question now of all those gentlemen who talk about real live Ministers of Education, and who talk about the Education Act, and what should be done by way of amendment - I ask what has been done during the last twenty three years. I say there has been no alteration or amendment made. I remember fighting-and I fought as bitterly as ever I did in my life-in the session of 1887 when a blow was struck at the teachers of the colony by doing away with the training of teachers. I remember when the general average was taken away, and when the strict average was applied. I say a grave mistake was made then, and a blow was struck from which the Education Boards and the teachers have never recovered. I again say that at that time an attempt was made to increase the school-age ; and I ask, seeing that oc- curred, Was that the way to improve educa- tion by having a real live Minister of Educa- tion? So far as my experience has gone, so far as teachers are concerned, and as to education generally, we have been doing better work during recent years than has been done in the years gone by. I must say this in de- fence of the Education Department : that we have now a system of technical education, and I ask, what was done in that direction before ? Now, I come to some remarks made by the member for Bruce, and I must express my regret that, when nothing else can be said in reference to a measure before the House, we have this cry of " Taihoa, taihoa !"; and the House is urged not to do anything this session, but that the Bill should be circulated, and that the House should pass the second reading and pro- ceed no further. Reforms and progress could never be made on such lines as that, and I can only understand it on the ground that, whilst the measure itself could not be taken exception to, this would be the means to prevent its further progress. I do not think there are many members who desire that there should be delay in respect to this Bill. I say, let us place it on the statute-book, let us- carefully watch its working, and our ex- perience will teach us the direction in which it may require amendment; and then next session we can, if necessary, make the requi- site amendments. The honourable member stated that he had not read the evidence, and because honourable members had not read the evidence he said that was another reason for postponement. My opinion is that if we postponed the Bill until members had read the evidence we would never pass the Bill. I hear members from time to time crying out for evidence, and they want that evidence printed, and one would think that when that evidence left the Printing Office they would rush at it. and peruse it word by word. I undertake to say that 95 per cent. of the members of this House, if their constituents were to take one of these papers and question them upon it, would be found to be unacquainted with its contents. I may say that, as the Commission was taking evidence, I watched carefully all that took place, and I could tell pretty well the gist of the evidence taken in each town, and, under those circumstances, I think I had a. better command of the question when I 
<page>636</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=676</url>
studied the matter at all, and who would have to go from page to page in order to master the details of the evidence given. Then, we are told that this is the first step to impair the Boards. I have heard that before ; but if it is the first step, well, it is not a bit too soon. My own opinion is that it will strengthen the position of the Boards. We are not interfering with the Boards and their appointment and control of the teachers, but we are, very pro- perly I think, preventing Boards from inter- fering with the salaries of the teachers. They often make regulations, and I will undertake to say there is not a Board in the colony that has for years conformed in respect to salaries to the regulations they have themselves made. If they had now to pay according to the regulations a good many of the teachers would have re- coveries to make from the Boards of Education. Now, in regard to the smaller schools, to show the anomalies that exist, I can point to cases where £42 is paid as a salary to a teacher in one district and $85-that is, double the money-to a teacher in another district where they were, perhaps, better able to afford it ; but at the same time I undertake to say that the service that the teacher receiving the smaller salary is required to perform is quite as well per- formed as that of the higher-paid teacher. All that money comes from the one chest-from the Public Account-and yet one teacher receives $85 and the other £42 for the same work. say it is much better to remove anomalies of that kind. Then, coming to the question raised by the honourable member for Riccarton, as to increasing the expense by the multiplication of these small schools, I do not think there is any danger in regard to that. I do not think that that danger exists, because we have a limiting power in respect to the building grant. The Boards of Education cannot put up immense schools ; and in the country dis- tricts there will be expenditure required in respect to building, and I am sorry to say the building grant is limited; but, at the same time, there is that power in respect to the multiplicity of the smaller schools, a danger pointed out by the honourable member for Riccarton. Now, with regard to that class of school called the half-time school, there is nothing to prevent that at all. There is no recommendation in respect to increased salaries to teachers of half-time schools, but in Com- mittee it will be easy to introduce an addition to provide for, say, an increase of 50 per cent. on the salary of the teachers of such schools. The total amount required if that were carried would be $700 a year, so that this is not an insurmountable difficulty. An Hon. MEMBER. - Fix a minimum. Mr. SEDDON .- On the question of a mini- mum there is nothing to prevent that being done now, and I am inclined to think it would be a proper thing to do. I am not at all ad- verse to fixing a minimum, because I think in the case of a young man who has to go and teach at one of these country schools of from one to twenty pupils, I think £2 per Mr. Seddon shilling too much. We could not have it less than that. That is my own view upon the matter ; but I agree that it would have to be carefully safeguarded, and it is much wiser to take the course we are taking, so that we may see how it works, rather than to rush into" diffi- culty that we do not know the end of. Now the Board, I may say again, may require assistance from settlers, in schools below the minimum of twenty. Some settlers-and I think very properly so, considering their circumstances- find the teachers in board and lodgings, which is an advantage, of course, to the teacher, while it is a help to the settler. It is easier for the settlers to contribute in that way than to find the cash. Then, the member for Christ- church City (Mr. Smith) raised the question as to side-schools, and as to instructions being assigned in the Bill. The arrangement as to the position to be held by the head mistress of side-schools has been left, as has every other question of organization, to the Boards to deal with. The Government have carefully avoided, as far as possible, interfering with the Boards' organization and administration. The moment we interfere there will be a danger of wrecking the Bill. The member for Palmerston pointed out a good many things we could have done, but I would point out we can do too much, and the moment we do that we bring op- position against the measure, and the next thing would be that these members would I tell the teachers that the Government wrecked the Bill by interfering with the Boards of Education. Therefore, by keeping the Boards solely and strictly to the teachers, that ground of objection is taken away, and that is why the Bill has been so well received, and that is why I know this Bill is going on the statute-book and going there this session. Then, Sir, I will come to the question raised by the member for Bruce, as to the terrible in- fliction that will be caused by this Bill on the teachers of Otago. I said in my opening speech that I had not received any objections to this Bill. It is quite true I did not receive any, but I have since learned that there was an ob- jection, but simply on minor grounds, from the Otago Education Board. Now, I come to the second-assistant in large schools, and I may say that none of these second-assistants would lose under scale No. 2 at all. If we adopted scale No. 2 to-morrow not a single second-assistant would lose in salary, and as they keep their present salaries for two years under the second proviso of clause 3 of the Bill I do not think there is much in the objection taken under that head. Now, here is the terrible loss inflicted under scale No. 1 : Four teachers lose £2 each, one loses .£5, and the others nil. That is how it affects Otago ; and yet the honourable member says, "Stop, pause ; read the Bill only a second time, and pass it next session." Now, Sir, the minimum salary of schools under twenty in Otago is $70. That is also the maximum, for the scale rises up to £100. All I have said in respect to this question is that probably the small schools in Otago might suffer; but the 
<page>637</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=677</url>
difficulty ; and, taking the number of schools into consideration, my own opinion is, with the Boards relieved as we are relieving them now to some extent, they can very well man- age. But, so far as the Government are concerned, we shall not be blamed so long as they see their way to do it. Now, objection was taken to the Board not re- quiring certificates. There is nothing in this Bill to prevent the Board requiring any certifi- cates for the various positions that it sees fit. This matter is left entirely to the Board. We have not interfered as far as this Bill is con- cerned, and, if the Boards still wish to recognise these certificates to insure efficiency, it is for the Board to do it. I may say it is not pro- posed by the department to follow the advice of the Commission in regard to certificates. I do not think it advisable to interfere in this matter, and, at the same time, we have not thought it advisable to disregard the university degrees held by some of our teachers. The fact of the matter is, I believe we ought to go fur- ther in respect to our teachers, and ought to go in for the training of our teachers, and, when we have the best trained men, some recognition in that respect, and some encouragement in the way of training teachers, would be a good thing for the colony. I hold these views very strongly indeed, and I say you must, for some of your teachers, have training-schools aided by the State, and assistance in the way of facilities should be given to attend our university classes. It is a step in the right direction, and anything within reason that is asked to further that I shall be most happy, so far as I am concerned, to give it my hearty co-operation. Now, the honourable member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher) took exception to the question of higher education. On that point I wish to remove any misapprehension. I am one of those who fully believe that if we are to hold our position as a nation, higher education must be placed within the reach of all that it is possible to give it to, and the more attention we pay to that the better it will be for the future of our country. With respect to the district high schools, and the proposals of the Bill affecting high schools, we have gone in the direction of making them free, and placing our education within the reach of all. And by taking the district high schools, and confining the Boards to what is laid down in the circular generally, I say we are going in the very direction the honourable gentleman was urging. We have decided,- "2. That the rest of the schools shall be as fully staffed as any other public school with the same average attendance :- "3. That the secondary pupils take arithmetic to a standard at least as high as that of the arithmetic for Standard VI. "4. That English be taken by all secondary pupils, and include the study of a work or works of some standard author-not less than eight hundred lines of poetry or two hundred pages of prose in a year. VOL. CXIX .- 42. pupil who has passed Standard VI. and is taking three or more of the following subjects, or 10s. per annum for each such pupil taking one subject, or £1 per annum for each such pupil taking two subjects :- 1\. Latin. 9. Botany .\* 10\. Mechanical draw- 2\. French. 3\. Euclid. ing. 4\. Algebra. 11. Book-keeping. 5\. Trigonometry. 12. Shorthand. 6\. Elementary me. 13. Agricultural chem- istry." chanics .\* 7\. Physics .\* 14\. Physiology .\* Etc. 8\. Chemistry .\* \* The work for these subjects must show an advance beyond what is offered or required for Standard VI. if the same subject is taken in Standard VI. "6. That, further, £4 per annum be paid on account of each free pupil who has passed Standard VI. and is taking not less than three secondary subjects in addition to English and arithmetic. "7. That, in addition to the extra capitation already named, £30 per annum be paid to each District High School having not less than twelve pupils who have passed Standard VI. and are taking three or more secondary subjects in addition to English and arithmetic." I say that that is a training and an oppor- tunity for those who desire to enter our Civil Service. I was surprised when I heard the honourable gentleman finding fault in so doing, especially seeing that in this circular we are going in the very direction he urged us to go. As regards payment for the instruction of pupil-teachers, I think that was raised by the honourable member for Palmerston, and 1 may say that payment for the instruction of pupil-teachers is not given in Auckland, nor is it given in Otago. In the scale it is included in the salaries of the head-teachers and first assistants. If you increase their salaries, it is tantamount to giving them, although you do not specifically state it, payment for the instruction of the pupil-teachers. Now, another question arises-that of house allow- ance. House allowance is small in small schools because such schools are found in the country where the rents are low. In the larger centres the rents are high, and correspondingly we must have a house allowance to agree. That follows, as a natural sequence, and we have stated it in the proposals -- the proportionate amount given in respect to this question of house allowance. I say there must be an equalising, otherwise no scale could be effec- tive or workable. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- Time is up. Mr. SEDDON .- I am sorry that I must con- clude ; but I express the hope that the Bill will be carried unanimously, and that we will get into Committee. It is well and wise to pass it, and place it on the statute-book of the colony. Bill read a second time. 
<page>638</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=678</url>
Mr. HALL- JONES (Minister for Public Works) .- 1 desire to lay on the table the Public Works Statement for the year, and I move that it do lie on the table and be printed. The estimates will follow somewhat later on this evening. Possibly they may not be down to-night, but the printers are at work on them now. I move, That the Statement lie on the table and be printed. Motion agreed to. The Statement was as follows :-- [For the Tables and Appendices, &c., attached to the Statement, see Parliamentary Paper, D .- 1.] Mr. Speaker,-It is with feelings of pleasure that I lay before honourable members my sixth Statement, especially as it has not fallen to the lot of any one of my predecessors to deliver six consecutive Public Works Statements. The work undertaken last year was of a more extensive character than during any of the past few years, and the total expenditure conse- quently reached a higher figure. A large amount of very useful work has been accom- plished, and the extent to which the improved conveniences are appreciated by our settlers is well evidenced by the demands made for further road, railway, and other facilities. Indeed, had these demands been complied with to anything like their full extent, the estimates of expendi- ture which I submit this evening would have been swelled to twice their present dimensions. In dealing with the question of expenditure upon public works, it is well to remember that it is only just over sixty years since New Zea- land became a British colony; and when honourable members bear in mind that at that time there were no roads, railways, or bridges, no telegraphic communication, no post-offices or other public buildings ; that education, be- yond that supplied by the missionaries, was practically unknown ; and the islands were only visited at rare intervals by sailing-ships, it must be admitted that the progress made since that time has been most satisfactory, and establishes a record of which we may justly be proud. Two thousand two hundred and twelve miles of rail- way have been constructed and opened for traf- fic, thousands of miles of road have been formed, Line. Tahekeroa-Ahuroa Helensville Northwards .. Gisborne Wharf-Ormond Gisborne-Karaka .. . . ! Stratford-Toko Stratford-Whangamomona North Island Main Trunk Poro-o-tarao-Ongarue .. .. Mangaonoho-Mangaweka .. Blenheim-Waipara Omaka-Seddon Waipara-Skargill .. Otago Central Wedderburn-Blackstone Hill .. .. Total | graph-lines established ; the necessary public buildings (including schools) have been erected at great cost ; and a large fleet of ships are now engaged in carrying to all parts of the world the products of our enterprising settlers. While this good work has been done during past years, we who for the time being have the welfare of the country intrusted to our charge must not ignore our responsibilities in seeing that steps are taken for the further develop- ment of our colony, and that every opportunity is thus afforded for our settlers to forward their products to the markets of the world at the lowest possible cost and in the shortest reason- able time. To enable this to be done, notwith- standing what pessimists may say, we must continue our policy of road- and railway-con- struction. We must further improve our ex- isting lines of communication ; and this, done with due regard to economy, will result in placing our country in a still more satisfactory position. Without proper means!of communi- cation our settlers are hampered and handi-  capped ; and it is our duty to remove the dis- abilities under which they labour, bearing in mind that, as the work progresses, each mile of railway completed and each chain of road formed is so much towards the end we have in view. Whilst making provision for the urgent re- quirements of the colony, the Government are of opinion that it would be extremely inadvis- able to enter upon a large borrowing policy for public works, and that we should adhere to the course followed in recent years, and make pro- vision for a fair rate of progress being main- tained both in railway- and road-construction. and provide accommodation and conveniences necessitated by the development of the colony, including the renewal with more permanent material of the old wooden buildings, many of which are past repairing. The sums provided in the estimates will ad- mit of the several works being continued at a reasonable speed, and it is hoped that the fol- lowing sections of railway will be opened for traffic before the end of the current financial year :- 1 1 Length. Section. 1 Miles. Chains. ! 69 4 43 10 . 40 6 .. 21 14 24 9 12 76 40 14 .. 23 12 . . 85 16 1 
<page>639</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=679</url>
more important of the works under construc- tion, the principal details of which I will give later on. Before outlining my proposals for expendi- ture I will briefly state the WAYS AND MEANS AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC- WORKS PURPOSES. At 31st March, 1900, the balance of the ways and means of the Public Works Fund amounted to £839,749, and further sums were provided last session, as under :- New loan 1,000,000 Transferred from revenue 500,000 There were also miscellaneous receipts to the amount of £1,787, thus making a gross total of £2,341,536. The expenditure last year amounted to £1,309,021, so that at the close of the year the balance of our ways and means was Class of Work. Total to 31st December, Railways-Construction 14,067,100 - Additions to open lines Roads 3,575,804 Public buildings 1,776,003 .. Immigration 2,144,386 . Purchase of Native lands 1,191,137 Lighthouses, harbour-works, and har- bour defences Telegraph extension. . . Development of goldfields Defence-works (general) .. . Departmental . Minor works and services .Cost and discount, raising loans, &c. 1,021,472 Totals .. 26,898,145 .. RAILWAYS UNDER CONSTRUCTION. The railways under construction were the same as during the previous year, but with two additions - namely, the Stratford-Kawa- kawa and the Heriot Extension lines. The ·expenditure amounted to considerably more than in the previous year-namely, £392,691, against £199,580; the increase being £193,111. The improved progress on all the more import- ant lines has been maintained, especially in the .case of the North Island Main Trunk Railway, so that for several of the principal lines sub- stantial votes must be asked for. I will now briefly describe what has been done on each of the railway-works in hand during the late year, : and also our proposals for the current year. # Kawakawa-Grahamtown. The work on the southern extension of the northern portion of this railway has been con- .tinued, the operations now extending over the the following additional funds :- £ New loan 1,000,000 Further transfer from re- 500,000 venue making altogether a gross total of available ways and means of £2,532,515. The estimates of expenditure for the current year total to £2,197,334 (in addition to £46,577 under the Government Loans to Local Bodies Account), thus leaving an unallocated balance of £335,181. TOTAL PUBLIC WORKS EXPENDITURE. The following table shows the total expendi- ture out of the Public Works Fund on all works and services throughout the colony up to the 31st December, 1890, and also up to the 31st March last, and in a separate column the expenditure during the late financial year :- Expenditure. Total to Year ended 1st January, 1891, to 31st 31st March, 31st March, March, 1901. 1890. 1901. 1901. £ € [2,025,391] (392,691 17,168,026 11,075,535 (325,032 5,563,949 1,988,145 315,791 733,647 2,509,650 121,364 214 3,333 2,147,719 1,964,970 773,833 28,688 880,095 85,518 965,613 6,517 600,849 906,158 50,101 305,309 686,353 561,101 15,907 125,252 120,240 549,960 429,720 37,650 109,528 459,317 12,933 349,789 308,161 673 300,689 7,472 1,057,771 36,299 1,460 34,287,647 7,389,502 1,309,021 whole eight miles authorised in 1899. Rail- laying has not yet been started, but rails have been procured, so that the work can be put in hand as soon as a sufficient length of formation is available. No suitable ballast has been dis- covered immediately adjacent to the work in hand, but a deposit of scoria-ash exists at a dis- tance of a mile and three-quarters from the line. It will be necessary to construct a branch line to enable this to be utilised. It is expected that the first section of the line will be finished and available for traffic by this time next year. A further link in the northwards extension of the southern portion of the line was completed during the year-namely, the short section of 1 mile 26 chains between Waiotu and Hukerenui -- which was opened for traffic on 1st March last. The survey of the intervening length be- tween the northern and southern portions of this railway has been proceeded with as oppor- tunity offered, the line having been definitely 
<page>640</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=680</url>
three miles further. The completion of this survey will be intrusted to an officer whose attention will be solely devoted to it, so as to insure its being finished at an early date. Preparations have been made to start work on the extension from Opau to Grahamtown. It was found that the original survey could be improved upon, and a new survey has accord- ingly been made, and plans of the bridge over the Whangarei River have been prepared. The total expenditure on this railway last year amounted to £13,101, and for the current year an authorisation of $15,000 is asked for. # Helensville Northwards. The Tahekeroa Section of this railway, 3 miles 18 chains in length, was completed and handed over to the Railway Department for regular traffic on the 19th December last. Work on the Komokoriki Section has been actively pro- ceeded with, and the line as far as the south end of the tunnel is completed, and the rails laid. More than three-fourths of the excava- tion in the tunnel has also been done, and the rest of the formation to Ahuroa is well in hand and should not take long to finish. A contract has been let for the supply of bricks for lining the tunnel. I am hopeful of being able to open the section to Ahuroa by about the 31st March next. The final location of the line beyond the end of the Komokoriki Section is now necessary in order to avoid any delay taking place on the completion of the works on that section, and the survey has accordingly been put in hand. The question has been raised as to whether the route for this railway by the Hoteo Valley is really the best that could be followed. Another route has been examined by a committee of the local settlers, and considered by them to be superior. In order to set this point at rest, instructions have been issued for the newly suggested route to be examined, and on com- pletion of such examination its merits will be carefully compared with those of the route previously proposed. The expenditure on this railway last year amounted to £11,933, and for the current year an authorisation of £15,000 is proposed. # Pacroa-Waihi. Only preliminary work had been done on this line up to the close of the financial year 1899- 1900. During last year, however, substantial progress was made, and work now extends for a distance of 6 miles 15 chains. The excavation of the long tunnel is well in hand, the position of the work at the end of September being as follows : - West end- Top heading 741 feet. . . Bottom heading 675 . . Bricking 359 .. East end -- 469 Top heading . . Bottom heading 457 An air shaft has also been sunk at the west end of the tunnel, about 600 ft. from the mouth. Platelaying has been started from the junction Karangahake. A contract has been let for the construction of a combined road and railway bridge over the Ohinemuri River at Karanga- hake, the contract price being £8,771. The expenditure on the line last year was £12,259, but this year it will be larger; an 1 authority for £20,000 is asked for. # Gisborne-Karaka. In the case of this railway also the only work done prior to the commencement of the late financial year was of a preliminary nature. During the late year, however, very substantial progress has been made, so that at the present time the formation is finished for about 12} miles ; all the bridges for the same distance have been erected, and the rails laid. A ballast-train is busy widening the banks, completing the station-yards, and ballasting. The station- buildings are also actively in progress, and I expect to have the line to Ormond ready for regular traffic by February next. The final location of the balance of the line to Karaka will be taken in hand as soon as a suitable officer can be detailed for the work. The ex- penditure on this railway last year exceeded the vote by £3,498, having amounted to £15,498. This year it will be even larger, and an authorisation of £20,000 will be required. # Stratford-Kawakawa. This is one of the new railways authorised last session. The survey was put in hand soon after Parliament rose, and construction-work started in April. Such good progress has been made that a large part of the first section to Toko, six miles and a half in length, is now ready for platelaying, and the rails, which have recently arrived, are now being sent up to the work. I have every confidence that this section of the railway will be opened for traffic by Christmas next. Survey-work is in progress on the next sec- tion of the line, so that by the time the for- mation to Toko is completed we shall be in a position to determine the best route to be taken beyond that township. The vote taken for this railway last year was £10,000, but scarcely any expenditure took place prior to the 31st March. For the current year an authority for £12,000 1 will be necessary. Honourable members are aware that in my last year's Statement it was suggested that this railway should be con- structed as a narrow-gauge line ; but an ex- 1 amination of the country showed that this was inadvisable, and, having in view the probable traffic as the line is extended, it was decided to construct it as a light railway, but without departing from the New Zealand standard gauge. North Island Main Trunk. A very large amount of work has been per- formed on this railway during the year. At the northern end especially, the engineering staff employed upon the line has fully realised the desire of the Government that the work should be pushed to completion with reasonable ex- pedition, and every effort has been made, 
<page>641</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=681</url>
ward the work as rapidly as possible. Regular traffic is carried on by the Railway Depart- ment as far as the Poro-o-tarao Tunnel-the watershed between the Waikato and Wanga- nui River systems - and from that point to Kawakawa or Ongarue the rails are al- ready laid, and the ballasting and erection of station-buildings is in progress. The plate- laying party is still at work, extending its operations towards Taumaranui, to which point the formation - work already extends, and bushfelling is in hand beyond the cross- ing of the Wanganui River. The railway at the northern end, therefore, has commenced to tap the celebrated Waimarino Forest. A contract was let in May last for a steel and timber bridge, 465 ft. long, over the Wanganui River at Taumaranui, and contracts have also been let for the steel girders for the three bridges over the Ongarue River. The majority of the piers of these latter bridges will be of timber, and a contract has been let for the supply of the iron cylinders for the remaining piers. At the southern end of the line the earth- works now extend nearly to Turangarere, & distance of thirty-nine miles from the terminus of the opened line at Mangaonoho, and sixty- one miles from the commencement of the rail- way at Marton. Considerable progress has been made with these works during the year, but still greater progress would have resulted if the roads in the district had been in suffi- ciently good order to admit of heavy carting being done in the winter. As much carting as possible was done during the summer and autumn, but it was impossible for the whole of the plant and supplies required during the winter months to be carried up in advance. Advantage will be taken as the weather im- proves and the roads are again fit for carting to send forward the necessary plant and ma- terial for the work. Total length of railway, Marton to Te Awamutu Length open for public traffic .. Additional length on which rails are laid Further length on which formation is practically complete Still further length on which work is in hand .. Making a total length finished or in progress of .. Of the remainder a final survey has been made .. Total Date of authorisation of railway Amount expended to 30th September, 1901 .. Estimated amount required to complete Number of workmen now employed I informed Parliament last session that, if ways and means were provided from time to time as required, this railway could be com- pleted and opened for traffic within about four years from the end of last session, and I see no reason to suppose that that expectation is not still capable of realisation. The total expendi- ture on the line during last financial year, ex- clusive of the cost of rails, sleepers, and other pletion. A view of the structure appended to this Statement will show the position of the work at a tolerably recent date. Platelaying between Makohine and Mangaweka is about to be proceeded with : practically all the rails and sleepers required for this section are now on the further side of the Makohine Ravine. A loco- motive and a train of ballast-wagons have also been arranged for, and are now in process of being conveyed to Pawerawera. I fully expect to have engines running over the Makohine Viaduct by 31st March next, and hope to have the whole section to Mangaweka ready for traffic about the same time. The Mangaweka Viaduct is in hand, the con- crete foundations being in progress at the site, and the ironwork in course of manufacture at the Makohine workshop. This viaduct, though. longer than Makohine, is not so high, and not nearly as difficult or expensive a structure. With favourable weather its erection will pro- bably not take more than four months from the time the finished materials can be railed through from the Makohine workshop, so that at a comparatively early date after the opening of the line to Mangaweka it will be possible to proceed with the platelaying beyond that town- ship towards Taihape. Contracts have been let for the steel super- structures of the bridges over the Toi-toi Creek and the Hautapu River, and all the steel and iron required for the remainder of the bridges up to Ohakune has been ordered from England. Instructions have also been issued for the heavier portions of the earthwork on the Muri- mutu and Raetihi Sections to be taken in hand when the necessary plant and supplies can be conveyed thither. Viewing the North Island Main Trunk Rail- way as a whole, the position of the works at the present time is as follows :- 210 miles. .. .. 69 miles. 18% .. 194 .. 30} .. . . 138 miles. . . . . 72 .. .. .. 210 miles. .. . . . . 10th November, 1884. .. £871,667 .. $986,000 . . 1,166 .. permanent-way materials supplied, was £109,832. This year a larger amount will be required, and an authorisation of $160,000 is accordingly pro- posed for it. Rimutaka Deviation. The detailed survey of the proposed deviation of the Rimutaka Railway between the Upper Hutt and Woodside, via the Tauherenikau 
<page>642</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=682</url>
been made to have a trial line run for a route by way of the Wainuiomata Valley, instructions have been issued to the Inspecting Engincer to make an examination of this route, so that a comparison may be made of its supposed advan- tages as against those of the Tauherenikau route. # Blenheim-Waipara. The works at the northern end of this railway are approaching completion, and the station- buildings at Seddon are about to be erected. It is probable that the line will be ready to hand over to the Railway Department for ordinary traffic shortly before the ensuing Christmas holidays. Representations having been made as to the necessity of providing some protection to the trains while crossing the Awatere Bridge from the very strong winds which occasionally blow up and down the Awatere Valley, it has been decided to erect a suitable wind-screen, the construction of which will be proceeded with immediately. At the southern end of the railway the work has made substantial progress. The earthworks on the first twelve miles are virtually complete, and the few small bridges on this length which are still incomplete are likely to be finished within a month or so. The laying of the rails has already been commenced, and the ballast- ing and erection of station-buildings will follow in due course. I fully expect that the first section at this end of the line-fourteen miles and a half in length, and extending as far as Skargill - will be ready for traffic early in the new year. The earthworks have been started on the section between Skargill and the Huru- nui River, and are making satisfactory pro- gress, and plans, &c., for the important bridge over the Hurunui River have been prepared, and tenders invited for its construction. This bridge will be 376 ft. long, and will include two spans of 100 ft. each, supported on concrete piers. Plans are also being prepared for the bridge over the Waiau River, near Parnassus, but, as this is beyond the point to which the construction of the railway has been authorised, it will be necessary to make provision for a fur- ther section of the line before a contract for this bridge can be entered into. The total expenditure on the Blenheim- Waipara Railway last year was £33,280, while liabilities to the amount of over $20,000 existed at the close of the year. This year an authori- sation of £45,000 is proposed. # Otago Central. Good progress has been made with the works on this railway during the year. The section between Wedderburn and Blackstone Hill is rapidly approaching completion, and will pro- bably be available for traffic early in December next. The heavy work in the Poolburn Gorge is well in hand, and much of it is nearing com- pletion. All the masonry culverts are complete up to the Manuherikia River, and the work in the tunnels is about half done. The founda- tions for the piers and abutments of the Pool- for the steel superstructures of both that via- duct and the Manuherikia Bridge has been let, and the majority of the cylinders for the latter are being conveyed to the site. Work has re- cently been undertaken on the Manuherikia- Spottis Section, several parties being now em- ployed upon it. Altogether the work on this railway has been pushed along with vigour, and the progress made is satisfactory. The expendi- ture on the line last year, according to the published accounts, was £61,347, but in reality it was in excess of this, as, owing to an un- fortunate accident in the Dunedin office, accounts representing nearly two months' expenditure on the railway were shut out at the close of the financial year. For the current year an authority for €100,000 has been pro- vided. # Heriot Extension. Work on the extension of the Heriot line towards Edie's was put in hand shortly before the close of the financial year. Some little time was lost through the severity of the weather in the winter, and the work has also been delayed by a difference of opinion amongst the  local residents as to the route which the line should take, which has rendered it advisable to restrict operations to the portion of the sec- tion about which there is no division of opinion. It will probably be to the best interests of the district to adhere to the route originally sur- veyed, and to make the terminus of the line at Edie Vale, as proposed originally. Scarcely any expenditure was charged against the vote of last year, and this year ₺5,000 has been provided on the estimates for this railway. # Catlin's River-Seaward Bush. At the Catlin's River end of this railway an extension of three miles and a half from Owaka has been in hand during the year, and the formation-works are well advanced and pro- ceeding satisfactorily. At the Seaward Bush end of the line the survey to Tokonui, which was in progress last year, has been completed, but the result has not been entirely satisfactory, and a further survey has therefore now been ordered to ascer- tain definitely which of the routes proposed for this section of the railway presents the greater advantages. Owing to its having been im- possible to commence construction - work on this section of the line pending a definite de- cision on the question of route, the expendi- ture last year fell considerably below the amount of the vote. This year it will pro- bably be larger, and an authorisation of £12,000 is therefore proposed. ! ## Riversdale-Switzers. A contract for the proposed combined road and railway bridge over the Mataura River has been prepared, but, as the cost would largely exceed the amount of last year's vote, I have not felt justified in inviting tenders until the matter could again be submitted to Parlia- ment. 1 
<page>643</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=683</url>
The formation-works on the first four miles of this line are approaching completion, and similar work is now in hand beyond that mileage. The rails, &c., for the permanent- way of the first section have been provided, and as soon as the formation is complete the platelaying will be put in hand. The expendi- ture on the line last year amounted to £7,764, and this year an authority for £12,000 is asked for. # Midland. Honourable members are aware from the report of the Midland Railway Commission, which has already been presented to Parlia- ment, of the result of the inquiry into the cost and value of the railway-works constructed by the Midland Railway Company, and of the contributions made thereto by the Crown. Coming to the question of construction, the section of the line between Jackson's and Otira, which was wholly constructed by the Govern- ment, was formally handed over to the Railway Department for regular working in November last, but goods trains had been running over it for nearly a year previously. At the Canterbury end of the railway, where the works are of the heaviest description, good progress has been made. The cuttings and banks on the first four miles and a half are nearly completed, and the tunnels on the same section are approaching completion. Tenders were invited for the completion of the viaduct  over Paterson's Creek, and that of Messrs. Scott Brothers, of Christchurch, accepted for the work. Plans for the larger viaduct over Stair- case Gully are now being prepared. The extension of the Nelson Section of the line to Tadmor, authorised last session, has been commenced, and the earthworks are making satisfactory progress. Plans were pre- pared for the large combined road and railway bridge over the Motueka River, and tenders for its erection have recently been received and declined. The Engineer-in-Chief is now re- considering the design of the bridge, with the view of effecting some economy in its con- struction. The survey of the proposed extension from Reefton towards Inangahua was put in hand as soon as a suitable officer could be spared to take charge of the work. The line has been permanently pegged for a distance of about eight miles, and longitudinal and cross sections completed for about five miles. We hope to be able to resume construction at the Reefton end of the line during the present year. The first work to be put in hand will, of course, be the bridge over the Inangahua River. Considerable work has been done during the year in making the necessary surveys in con- nection with the proposed long tunnel between Otira and the Bealey. Before definitely under- taking the construction of a work of such great magnitude, however, the Government has con- sidered it desirable to call in further expert advice, and in pursuance of this decision we are now in communication with railway authori- the view of obtaining a report from an American or Canadian engineer of eminence, and of experience in the construction of mountain railways, on the different proposals that have been made in reference to the construction of this particular section of the railway. The total expenditure on the Midland Rail- way last year amounted to £41,328. This year it will doubtless be heavier, owing to work being in hand at the Nelson end, and the probability of work being started between Reefton and Inangahua, and possibly between Otira and the Bealey. The proposed authori- sation is therefore £100,000. Greymouth-Hokitika : Extension to Ross. This extension originally formed part of the Grey-Hokitika and Midland scheme, and & trial survey was made of it. It is about fifteen miles in length, running through level country, and taps over half a million acres of the finest forest in the colony. Four sawmills are now in operation, and there is a vast quantity of silver-pine timber suitable for railway sleepers available. The estimated output of sawn timber is 6,000,000 ft. per annum. The main road from Ross to the Waiho and the Francis Joseph Glacier is completed, and a great tourist traffic would eventuate if the line were made, for the mountain, lake, and forest scenery of south Westland is unsurpassed. The present population-consisting of settlers, miners, sawmillers, and bushmen - which would be served by the railway numbers 1,000, and there is a vast area of good land suitable which would be settled if this line were con- structed, and the mineral deposits well known to exist were developed. The amount asked for the current year is #2,000. # Ngahere-Blackball. The selection of a suitable site for the pro- posed bridge over the Grey River has proved to be a work of much difficulty, as great changes in the river-bed in the neighbourhood of the proposed bridge have taken place in recent years, and similar changes may take place in the future. A good site has now been selected, however ; but it is evident that the cost of a substantial structure will amount to a large sum, and the question seems to require further consideration before any definite undertaking is entered into. Total Appropriations for Railways. In addition to the sums already mentioned, smaller authorisations, totalling to $7,500, are proposed under various heads, and £76,000 for permanent-way and other materials, thus making the total authorisations for railway- construction purposes $601,500, on account of which a vote for the current year of £561,000 is proposed. ROADS, ETC. Roads and other Works under the Control of the Minister of Lands. The amount authorised last year for roads and other works was £651,717, and the amount 
<page>644</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=684</url>
there was actually expended during the year £310,660, for which amount 621 miles of dray- roads and 328 miles of bridle-roads were con- structed, 737 miles of dray-roads and 175 miles of bridle-roads were widened and improved, and 2,272 miles of dray-roads and 1,032 miles of bridle-roads were maintained during the year. The bridges constructed were 324, of a total length of 12,448 ft .; and the culverts 3,497, of a total length of 70,632 ft. Out of the sum of $310,660 expended, £85,244 was disbursed through local bodies, and £225,416 by the staff of the department. At the end of the year authorities remained with local bodies to the extent of £143,860, and with the staff to the extent of £292,386-a total liability of £436,246. The largest amount of work last year was done in the Auckland District, the expenditure there amounting to £92,255. In the other dis- tricts it was as follows : Hawke's Bay, £31,336 ; Taranaki, £33,088; Wellington, £72,039 ; Nel- son, £9,278; Marlborough, £13,933; Canter- bury, 8,015; Westland, £11,450; Otago, £15,902 ; and Southland, £20,299 ; with a general expenditure of £3,065. The total last year was £29,536 more than in the previous year, being greater in the Districts of Auck- land, Taranaki, Wellington, Nelson, Westland, Canterbury, and Otago, and a little less in the other districts. The very large number of roads which had to be dealt with-namely, 2,067-involved great  labour in administration and arranging for the prosecution of the necessary works. The appro- priations were not printed until the 15th Novem- ber. After that the new items had to be con- sidered, authorised, and the carrying-out of the works prepared for. The first part of the season, up to the New Year, was a wet one nearly all over New Zealand, and, in conse- quence, it was found impracticable to begin several very necessary works-road-metalling especially. Indeed, the summer season this year has been a short one for the execution of works which had to be done while roads were dry ; but, notwithstanding this, it will be seen from what has been stated that the work exe- . cuted was about equal to what was done during the previous year. The expenditure was some- what larger, which was partly due to the greater number of roads which had to be maintained. Dray-roads totalling to 2,273 miles, and 1,033 miles of bridle-road, were kept in repair, as against 1,896 miles of dray-road and 937 miles of bridle-road in the year 1899-1900. Out of the 2,067 works for which money was voted, 1,189 were begun or finished during the year. The others could not be prepared in time for any work being done before the 31st March, although instructions had been given for the whole of the works on the appro- priations to be proceeded with. Out of these 1,189 works, 405 have been done by the local bodies and 784 by the department. The improvement of the navigation of the Wanganui River, and its great tributary the Tangarakau, has been continued under the amounted to £1,250. This has enabled a light- draught steamer to reach Putikituna, on the Tangarakau, and goods can in this way be conveyed to the Whangamomona Settlement by water, within six miles of the middle of the valley. Two lines of steamers now navigate the river as far as Pipiriki, fifty-six miles from Wanganui, greatly to the advantage of settlers on its banks and inland. Out of the Land for Settlements Account there was expended £5,946 in the construction of thirteen miles of dray-roads, two bridges. and seventy-three culverts. In addition, 10} miles of dray-roads were improved and twenty eight miles maintained. Owing to the extension of land-settlement. and the consequent increase in the departmen- tal business, it was decided to sever from the Lands and Survey Department at the end of last financial year the work of construction and the administration of roads and similar works. In accordance with this decision most of the officers of the Lands and Survey Department previously engaged on roads, and office work appertaining thereto, were transferred to a new department, called the " Department of Roads." Under this department is now placed the re- sponsibility of carrying out all the works for roads and kindred purposes formerly super- vised by the Lands and Survey Department, as well as the general administration of the laws relating to roads. It is yet too early to speak definitely, but so far the change has worked satisfactorily, and every confidence is felt for the future success of the arrangement. It is proposed to carry on the roadworks with judicious expedition, and to endeavour to com- plete as soon as possible works already begun, and those for which money has been voted in previous years, without neglecting the equally important duty of keeping up with the ever- advancing border of settlement with bridle- tracks at least, if with nothing better. Roads on Goldfields, Mines Department. The vote last year under this head amounted to £83,650, the expenditure being £48,417, with liabilities at the end of the year amounting to £49,221. The sum proposed to be authorised for the current year is £115,989, on account of which a vote of £84,000 is asked for. DEVELOPMENT OF GOLDFIELDS AND MINING. The value of gold entered for export during 1900 was £1,439,602, being somewhat less than during the previous year ; but, as stated by my colleague in his Mines Statement, notwithstand- ing this decrease there was an actual increase in the value of the general mineral production. The increase in the value of gold entered for export during the nine months ended the 30th September last was €174,528 over the value for the similar period of 1900, and it is expected that the results for the whole year will equal, if they do not exceed, those for 1899, which were the highest for the previous twenty-six years. For the first time the output of coal and 
<page>645</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=685</url>
output for 1900 being 1,093,990 tons. The quantity of gold entered for export dur- ing 1900 was 373,616 oz., valued at £1,439,602, and of silver, 326,457 oz., valued at £38,879 ; as compared with 389,558 oz. cf gold, valued at £1,513,173, and of silver 349,338 oz., valued at £40,838, for 1899, being a decrease of 15,942 oz. of gold, valued at £73,571, and 22,881 oz. of silver, valued at £1,959. The Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the question of proclaiming rivers in the Middle Island to be watercourses into which tailings and mining debris may be discharged under the provisions of the Mining Acts has completed its labours, and the report has been presented to Parliament. A settlement of the claims of the farmers is gradually being arrived at on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission, and it is expected that before long most of them will be adjusted, and that many of the rivers which have been reported on will be proclaimed. The amount expended last financial year on works for the development of the goldfields was £15,907, while the liabilities amounted to £2,011. It is proposed to take a vote of $50,000 for the current year. # TELEGRAPH EXTENSION. The expenditure under this head was £50,101, which includes £14,016 for new exchanges and additions to existing exchanges. The new exchanges opened were :- Welling-  ton District : Pahiatua and Woodville. Dunedin District : Edendale, Lumsden, Ngapara, River- ton, Waikouaiti, and Wyndham. Trunk wires connecting the following ex- changes have been erected :- Wellington Dis- trict : Marton and Wanganui; Pahiatua and Canterbury District : Palmerston North. Timaru and Fairlie. Dunedin District : Inver- cargill and Wyndham ; Invercargill and River- ton ; Main line and Waikouaiti; Winton and Lumsden ; Wyndham and Edendale. The total number of subscribers at the end of the financial year was 8,210. The most important extensions to new dis- tricts were : - Auckland District : Dargaville to Tangiteroria : Howick to Motuihi Island ; Kau- kapakapa to Makarau ; Ohaeawai to Pakaraka ; Kaihu to Aranga. Wellington District : Strath- more to Wangamomona ; Greenmeadows to Taradale and Mecance ; Alfredton to Pongaroa ; Rongotea to Glen Oroua. Nelson District : Westport to Mokihinui Mine; ferry wires at Haast and Arawata Rivers. Canterbury Dis- trict: Christchurch to Port Levy ; Christ- church to Gebbie's Flat ; Waimate to Waihao Downs. Dunedin District : Duntroon to Ma- erewhenua ; Georgetown to Ikawai; George- town to Borton's; Ranfurly to Wedderburn ; Heriot to Dunrobin ; Invercargill to Waima. haka ; Riverton to Gummie's Bush. Additional accommodation to existing lines has been provided by the erection of wires :- Auckland District: Auckland to Mahoenui ; Whangarei to Kawakawa. Wellington Dis- trict : Wanganui to Mahoenui ; Wellington to heim ; Reefton to Greymouth. Dunedin Dis- trict : Lawrence to Clyde ; Invercargill to Gore. The vote asked for this year is £40,489, and provides for new exchanges, additions to exist- ing exchanges, additional wire accommodation, and extensions to new districts. # PUBLIC BUILDINGS. The expenditure upon our public buildings again showed an increase over the previous year, though the increase was not large, being only £11,306-namely, ₺5,937 under the Public Works Fund, and £5,369 under the Consoli- dated Fund. The appropriations proposed for the current year amount to £254,000, namely : £46,750 under the Consolidated Fund, and £207,250 under the Public Works Fund. The principal works carried out last year or pro- vided for this year are as follow :- # General. The fitting-up of the new library wing of the Parliament Buildings, altering the buildings at Mount Cook to adapt them to a Defence depot, and sundry interior renovations and sanitary improvements at the General Departmental Buildings were carried out under this head last year. The vote for the current year provides for new offices and laboratories for the Mines, Agricultural, and Public Health Departments, acquisition of the land for some necessary addi- tions to the Departmental Buildings in Auck- land, completing the alterations at the Mount Cook Defence Depot, partial rebuilding Depart- mental Offices, Napier, completion of fittings of new and of renovation of old portion of Par- liament Buildings, and sundry minor works. # Judicial. Courthouses .- New Courthouses have been erected or are in hand at Te Awamutu, Manga- weka, Collingwood, Temuka, Hampden, Dun- edin, and the Bluff ; and extensive renovations have been effected at Auckland, Hikurangi, Whakatane, Taupo, and Wanganui. The prin- cipal works provided for in the vote for the current year are the completion of the new law. courts at Dunedin ; new Magistrate's Court, Wellington ; new Courthouses at Waihi, Opu- nake, Outram, Gore, and Orepuki; and addi- tions, renovations, or improvements at Nga- ruawahia, Wairoa, Napier, Waipawa, Patea, Feilding, Palmerston North, Carterton, West. port, Kumara, Hokitika, Christchurch, Wai- mate, Oamaru, Lawrence, and Invercargill. Gaols. - The total expenditure under this head last year only amounted to £1,258. The principal work in hand was the continuation of operations at the new gaol at Mount Eden, Auckland, with minor works at Napier, Wel- lington, and Dunedin. Provision is made in current year's vote for continuing operations in Auckland, for additions to gaol building and new Gaoler's house at Wellington, Gaolers' houses at Westport and Dunedin, new warders' cottages at Lyttelton, and for a new gaol on a new site at Invercargill. 
<page>646</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=686</url>
works under the heading of " Police Stations " have been in hand during the year, the principal items being as follows : New stations at Hamil- ton West, Gisborne, Feilding, Westport, Arrow- town, and Invercargill; new quarters at New Plymouth, Nelson, Queenstown, and Bluff ; purchase of land at Kaiapoi ; and additions or extensive renovations at Ngaruawahia, Gis- borne, Spit, Inglewood, Manaia, Waverley, Marton, Lower Hutt, Blenheim, Lyell, Grey- mouth, Rangiora, Christchurch, Timaru, and Winton. The principal works provided for this year are new cells, watchhouse, and quarters at Auckland ; additions at Mount Cook, Welling- ton ; new stations at Onehunga, Tolago Bay, Ormondville, Patea, Taihape, Akaroa, Waikou- aiti, Dunedin (King Street), Outram, and Rox- burgh ; new quarters at Waipawa, Denniston, Timaru, and Oamaru ; and additions or exten- sive renovations at Aratapu, Kawhia, Clive, Waitara, Stratford, Opunake, Hawera, Wanga- nui, Kimbolton, Hokitika, Cheviot, Southbridge, Lyttelton, Ashburton, Glenavy, St. Bathans, Cromwell, Ophir, and Lawrence. # Post and Telegraph. New post-offices were erected at Karanga- hake, Hamilton, Wereroa, Eketahuna, Master- ton, Petone, Wellington (Newtown), Takaka, Sumner, Naseby, and Bluff ; land and buildings were purchased at Ponsonby and Papanui; a new site at Inglewood ; custodian's quarters built at Auckland ; and extensive alterations or  additions at Auckland, Otahuhu, Rotorua, Wairoa, New Plymouth, Christchurch (tele- phone exchange), Clyde, Cromwell, Alexandra, and Roxburgh ; and contributions towards new offices in railway-stations were made at Clinton and Morven. In the vote for the current year provision is made for a commencement with the new Pacific cable station at Doubtless Bay ; for new post-offices at Dargaville, Aratapu, Pa- paroa, Onehunga, Mercer, Kawhia, Tolago Bay, Gisborne, Spit, Weber, New Plymouth, Toko, Inglewood, Opunake, Wanganui, Rae- tihi, Hunterville, Bulls, Feilding, Levin, Po- ngaroa, Alfredton, Carterton, Motueka, Dennis- ton, Brunnerton, Hanmer Springs, Ashburton, Temuka, Caversham, and Gore; for new quarters at Tarawera, Kaikoura, and Tapanui ; and for additions, alterations, or extensive renovations at Auckland, Dannevirke, Wood- ville, Hawera, Foxton, Picton, Blenheim, Renwicktown, Nelson, Collingwood, Westport, Greymouth, Hokitika, Christchurch, Lyttel- ton, Timaru, Oamaru, Dunedin (both telegraph- and post-offices), South Dunedin, and Invercar- gill ; and for compensation that will be payable for the land taken for the enlargement of the General Post Office. # Customhouses. Only £875 was expended under this head last year, principally in connection with additions to the Wanganui Customhouse. This year pro- vision is made for completing this work, and also for new sites and buildings at Wellington and Timaru. The expenditure on new works was slightly in excess of the previous year's figures. The principal expenditure was again in connection with the Porirua Asylum, which absorbed 910,587. An expenditure of over £3,000 also took place on additions to the Auckland Asylum, and smaller amounts were spent at Wellington (Mount View), Nelson, Seacliff, &c. For the current year provision is made for completing the Porirua building; for completing the addi- tions now in hand at Auckland and Nelson ; for some necessary enlargements and the com- pletion of the electric - light installation at Seacliff ; and for minor works at Wellington, Hokitika, and Sunnyside. ## Schools. The amount voted for school-buildings last year was £90,655, namely: #25,000 under the Consolidated Fund, and £65,655 under the Public Works Fund. The expenditure amounted to £58,681, namely : £25,000 under the former and £33,681 under the latter fund. As in former years, the bulk of this money was intrusted to the Education Boards for ex- penditure, the. only works directly controlled by the Government being the industrial and Native schools, and School for Deaf-mutes, &c. Native schools were erected last year, or are now in course of erection, at Oro- mahoe, Omarumutu, Whareponga, Parawera, Kerepehi, Whakarewarewa, Tapuacharuru, Taumaranui, and Te Haroto, and additions or repairs have been effected at Te Ahuahu, Poroti, Kaikohe, and Koroniti. This year we ask for a total vote of £85,000, namely : $25,000 under the Consolidated Fund, and $60,000 under the Public Works Fund. Provision is made for a commencement with the new school for deaf-mutes, also a home for weak-minded and epileptic children, and for the following works under the head of " Industrial Schools," namely : Completion of the altera- tions at Mount Albert (Auckland) ; clearing, draining, fencing, &c., on the new site at Levin, and for a commencement with the new build- ing ; additions, alterations, and furnishings at Te Oranga Home (Christchurch) ; additional buildings, &c., at Burnham; and sundry fur- nishings at Caversham. # Miscellaneous. Provision is also made under the "Public 1 Buildings " vote for erections required by the Agricultural Department at Hunterville, Pal- merston North, Carterton, Palmerston South, Roxburgh, and Invercargill, in addition to the new laboratories in Wellington already referred to ; also for the following works under the head "Hospitals and other charitable institutions," Grants-in-aid to the Waihi, Wairoa, Napier, Picton, and Greymouth Hospitals ; for a cottage hospital at Kaikoura ; for special wards for the treatment of delirium tremens cases at the four 1 principal centres of population ; and for a com- mencement with the proposed sanatorium for consumptives. 
<page>647</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=687</url>
DEFENCES. The expenditure on new lighthouse-works last year was very light. This year provision is made for the new light at Kaiourangi Point, for a commencement with a new tower and providing a new lantern at Cape Campbell, and for connecting the principal lighthouses with the telegraph system. The expenditure on harbour-works was also rather light, the principal items being Napier Spit protection, snagging the Manawatu and Little Wanganui Rivers, and a new wharf at Karamea. This year provision is made for new wharves at Maungaturoto, Manukau Sandspit, Orua Bay, Mokau, Pakawau, Bruce Bay, and Okuru ; and for repairing and extending the wharf at Okarito; also for other necessary works at Oahanga, Wairoa, Moutere, Motueka, and Collingwood ; and for continuing the Spit protection-works at Napier, and the Sticking Point reclamation-works at Lyttelton. The expenditure under the head of " Harbour Defences " was also less than usual last year, but this year a much larger expenditure has been provided for, the amount proposed for same being $25,000. In the case of the vote for contingent defence also the expenditure fell below the amount for the previous year, but this year a larger vote is provided for, principally to meet the payments for the field batteries, submarine-mining vessels, and material ordered, which is expected to come. to charge during the year. # CONCLUSION. In allocating the amounts proposed for the several purposes due consideration has been given to what I believe to be the wishes of honourable members -- namely, that the works should be proceeded with at a reasonable speed, and especially that the formation of roads to back blocks should be pushed forward, the work being done at a time when the best results may be obtained. Every consideration has been given to the urgent requirements of the colony, and I have confidence that the result at the end of the year will give general satisfaction. The House adjourned at twenty-five minutes to two o'clock a.m. (Wednesday). 