<page>1198</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1238</url>
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Thursday, 7th November, 1901. First Readings-Second Readings-Third Reading- Victoria College-Companies Bill- Death of ise Hon. Mr. Bonar-Library - Factories Bill - Timber Export Bill - Nelson Harbour Paari Bill - Native Land Claims Adjustment stì LAWS Amendment Bill - Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase and Empowering Ki .: - Public Works Bill-Victoria College Site Bili- 
<page>1199</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1239</url>
Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill-Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill-Public Works Bill-Appropriation Bill- Adjournment. The Hon. the SPEAKER took the chair at eleven o'clock. PRAYERS. # FIRST READINGS. Chatham Islands County Bill, Flax Grading and Export Bill, Mining Bill, Manawatu Rail- way Sale and Purchase Empowering Bill, Nelson Harbour Board Bill, Public Works Bill, Public Health Bill (No. 2), Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, Registration of Births Extension Bill, Remuera Waterworks Em- powering Bill, Timber Export Bill, Victoria College Site Bill, Westland and Nelson Coal- fields Administration Bill, Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, Dune- din City and Suburban Tramways Bill. # SECOND READINGS. Chatham Islands County Bill, Flax Grading and Export Bill, Mining Bill, Public Works Bill, Public Health Bill (No. 2), Registration of Births Extension Bill, Remuera Waterworks Empowering Bill, Westland and Nelson Coal- fields Administration Bill. # THIRD READINGS. Chatham Islands County Bill, Flax Grading and Export Bill, Mining Bill, Public Health  Bill (No. 2), Registration of Births Extension Bill, Remuera Waterworks Empowering Bill, Westland and Nelson Coalfields Administration Bill.   # VICTORIA COLLEGE. The Hon. Mr. REEVES said it was not his intention to take up the time of the Council in moving the resolution standing in his name. There seemed to be very great difficulty in locating the site for this particular institution. The people of Wellington were fighting like Kilkenny cats over it, until at last it came to this : that some steps must be taken in order to locate this very valuable institution in some part of the Cook Strait settlement. It would be within the recollection of honourable mem- bers of the Council that last year he moved a similar resolution, which was carried ; and he thought the good sense and judgment of the Council on this occasion would also support this motion. He, therefore, begged to move the following resolution : That, seeing the Victoria College Board of Governors is unable to obtain a suitable site for the College buildings in or near the City of Wellington, and that the same is apparentiy unobtainable, it is desirable that the Government assume full control of the matter, and take the necessary steps to enable them to fix a site for the institution in or near the City of Nelson, which, in the opinion of this Council, is the most central so far as the various provincial districts affected are concerned, and in all other respects the most suitable position for its location. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER said, Con- sidering there was now a Bill in process of passing through Parliament dealing with this subject, which, if passed, would certainly de- stroy the preamble of the honourable gentle- man's motion, it would, perhaps, be well to adjourn this matter till to-morrow. He begged to move, That the motion be adjourned till to- morrow. The Hon. Mr. REEVES said he wished to point out to the Hon. the Minister that the Bill of which he spoke had not got the remotest chance of passing through the other House. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- I cannot say that. The Hon. Mr. REEVES .- I can. The Hon. Mr. JENKINSON said he thought that was rather a rash statement to make. He understood that a Conference had been held, as a result of which the Bill referred to would pass in a very short time. He did not wish to take up the time of the Council, but would point out that the statement that the College Board of Governors was unable to obtain a suitable site for the College was not correct. They were quite able to obtain a suitable site, but what they wanted to do was to obtain the most suit- able site. This was only one of the honourable gentleman's annual attempts to advertise a little place that was never heard of. It would be quite absurd to locate a university such as the Victoria College University at a place like Nelson, for the expenses incurred by students coming from other parts would be considerable ; and, he understood, it was only possible to get to it in some weather, the bar and the harbour of Nelson being in a very dangerous state. Ho did not think the honourable gentleman was in earnest in putting such a motion as this on the Order Paper at this stage of the session. He (Mr. Jenkinson) thought it was quite absurd. The Hon. Mr. JONES said he would not object to Nelson having the Victoria College if it were possible to come to some agreement or other ; but, great as was the difficulty of coming to some agreement now as regarded the location of the building in Wellington, the difficulty would be still greater if the question of placing the College at Nelson were raised and debated in Parliament. For instance, some thought that it would be better to have the College at Taranaki, others thought it would be better to have it in Marlborough, and others at Wanganui. All these conflicting interests would be aroused, and the result would be that the matter would never be settled. He believed that, although this struggle had been going on for three or four years now, they were on the eve of having it settled for good and all. The Hon. Mr. T. KELLY did not intend to express any opinion on the resolution at pre- sent, but he thought the Minister's request, that the debate be adjourned, was reasonable, and would postpone his remarks to a future occasion. He would vote fo the adjournment of the debate. 
<page>1200</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1240</url>
motion be adjourned till half - past seven o'clock. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER said he would say half-past seven, and if the Bill deal- ing with the matter had not come down from another place then, and there was an oppor- tunity of its coming down, the debate could be still further adjourned. Debate adjourned accordingly. # COMPANIES BILL. A message was received from the House of Representatives containing certain amendments in this Bill, in which they asked the concur- rence of the Council. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER said he did not see any reason why the Council should not accept these amendments in the Companies Bill. It made the provisions of the Mining Companies Act to apply to all mining com- panies registered under the Companies Act or any of its amendments. The clauses in ques- tion were 32 and 33. The first was that direc- tors had to furnish the half-yearly statement, and the second was that clause 33 enacted that the books of companies were to be open to in- spection. He thought they could safely accept these amendments, and moved, That the Coun- cil cmcurred in the amendments made by the House of Representatives. Motion agreed to. DEATH OF THE HON. MR. BONAR. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- Sir, I beg to state to the Council that information has been received of the death of the Hon. Mr. Bonar. I think it might be suitable to the feelings of the Council if, after expressing the regret which we all feel on this occasion, I should move a motion of adjournment. I beg to move, That the Council adjourn for one hour, out of respect for the honourable gentleman's death. Sir, he was an old member of the Council, as he was appointed in the year 1868, and he had therefore given the best years of his life to the service of his country. In the early days of the West Coast he rapidly rose to first rank among the persons who filled public positions. He was the first chairman of a County Council on the West Coast, and when that district was made a province the confi- dence of the people was shown by his election as the first Superintendent, a position he held until the abolition of the provinces. I beg to move that the Council adjourn for an hour, out of respect for the late Hon. Mr. Bonar. The Hon. Mr. REEVES .- Sir, in seconding this motion, I feel rather strongly about it. I have known the late honourable gentleman for considerably over forty years. I knew him in Melbourne when he was quite a young man, and when he was employed in a very large firm there-Messrs. Henty and Co. I also knew him on the West Coast, and, although our late departed friend and I never agreed in politics in any form at all, I always found him to be an upright, honest, straightforward man. I can state without hesitation that he has honest man." The Hon. Mr. T. KELLY .- I would like, on this occasion, to say a few words to the Council. I have known the Hon. Mr. Bonar for the last thirty-five years. I met him first on my way to Melbourne in 1863, and I can truly say that he was one of the best specimens of manhood- full of geniality and good-fellowship. I did not meet him again until the year 1869, when I took my seat in the House of Representatives and found him a member of the Council ; and, from my own knowledge of him, I can con- scientiously say that he did good service to the colony in this branch of the Legisature, and therefore I beg to express my regret for the loss of an old colleague. Motion agreed to, and Council adjourned for one hour. # LIBRARY. The Hon. Mr. RIGG brought up the Report of the Library Committee, recommending that members of both Houses of Parliament residing in or within fifteen miles from Wellington be the Committee for the control and manage- ment of the Library during the recess. Motion agreed to. # FACTORIES BILL. A message was received from the House of Representatives desiring a Conference on the subject of the amendments of the Legislative Council in this Bill. On the motion of the Hon. Mr. JONES, the Hon. Mr. Bowen, the Hon. Mr. Jenkinson, the Hon. Mr. Jones, the Hon. Mr. W. Kelly, and the Hon. Mr. Pinkerton were appointed Man- agers on behalf of the Council, and a time and place for the Conference was appointed. Subsequently, The Hon. Mr. JONES brought up the report of the Conference on the Factories Bill, as fol- lows : - "The Managers appointed by the Legislative Council to conduct the Conference upon the Factories Bill have the honour to report that they have met the Managers appointed by the House of Representatives, and they have come to the following agreement, namely : - " In new clause 19A, fine 3, after ' women,' to insert ' over the age of eighteen years.' "In clause 20, subclause (3), to restore the first proviso. " In clause 2, to amend the last paragraph so as to read as follows : 'Boy ' means every male under the age of sixteen years. "The other amendments made by the Council are accepted." He moved that the report be agreed to. The Hon. Mr. RIGG said he merely rose to congratulate the Managers on the very satis. factory result of their labours. He did so for the reason that he was very anxious himself to be on the Conference, not that he wished to go back on anything the Council had done in the way of amending the Bill, but so that he might be in a position to point out to the representa- tives in another place that the Bill as passed 
<page>1201</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1241</url>
law in existence, and that the mere inclusion of woollen-mills in it did not alter what was the existing law. That was the sole desire he had in asking to be present on the Conference. He thought, from what he had learned privately, that the Bill would have a very poor chance of passing, and he was therefore glad to see that the Managers appointed had succeeded in over- coming any difficulty, and he heartily congra- tulated them on the fact that as a result of their labours there was a very substantial benefit achieved, and an improvement made on the present law. The Hon. Mr. BOLT thought the Council would generally agree that the report was a satisfactory one, and that the Managers had been able to settle what was a very knotty question on a basis which he believed would meet the wishes of both parties. He rose at the present time merely to state that when the Bill was in Committee he received a telegram from the Workers' Union in Kaiapoi, stating that four hundred workers were in favour of the forty-five hours per week. From information he had received, which he believed to be from a reliable source, he made a statement to the effect that there were only a hundred and fifty workers in the mill which would be affected by the forty-five hours' clause, and that, conse- quently, the telegram was to some extent mis- leading ; but he had since learned that that statement was incorrect. He found, by com- municating with the mills, that there were actually 265 persons affected by this clause. He thought, however, that the Kaiapoi people, as well as those connected with the other woollen-mills in the colony, would be fully satis- fied with the result arrived at by the Managers of the Conference. The Hon. Mr. LEE SMITH said the only thing he regretted about the Bill was that the Council had given way on the question that woollen-mills alone should be affected by this clause. As he had observed before, there were a number of industries in exactly the same position as the woollen-mills, and he did not see why the same consideration should not be given to them as in the case of the woollen- mills. The Hon. Mr. JONES wished to say a few words in order to explain exactly how matters stood now in regard to one or two clauses. The woollen-mills clause, as it was introduced into the Council, applied to boys and women who worked forty-eight hours a week. As the clause was now amended a concession had been made so that only women over eighteen and boys over sixteen could work the forty-eight hours ; boys under sixteen and women under eighteen could work only the forty-five hours. That seemed to him to be a very fair concession, and the advantage of the measure was that in all other factories where young people were engaged, forty-five hours a week only would be worked by them. In all other important re- spects the measure was left as it passed the Council, and he thought that they might con- gratulate themselves that the measure was passing as it stood now, after having had such a stormy passage through the Legislature. He felt that it would be a benefit to all concerned, both employers and workers. Report agreed to. TIMBER EXPORT BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- Sir, I hope the Council will not look upon this Bill as in any shape or form a Bill which we have brought in by way of reprisal against the Com- monwealth. It is quite unnecessary for us to go in for reprisals, because I think we can stand on our own bottom as well as the Commonwealth. But at the same time we have to protect our own industries, and we do not want timber which has got a world-wide value for certain purposes to be taken from our shores for the propping-up of the sawmilling industry on the other side when we would very much prefer that that timber should go away from us in the condition of sawn timber. ' That is all we want, and we do not ask the Council to pass this Bill through in a form which means that it has absolutely to come into force to-mor- row. All we ask is that power shall be given to the Governor in Council, if necessary, to give effect to this Bill, after we have seen what the Commonwealth Parliament do in re- gard to their tariff, in order to protect our saw- millers. We are perfectly willing to sell them our timber, but we say, "If you want our timber for butter-boxes you must allow us to saw it, and to pay our own men for the work, and you can get it in the shape of butter-box planks, otherwise we shall put this tariff on to it." That is the whole aim and object of the Bill. We do not want any one to look upon it in any shape or form as in the manner of a reprisal. It is simply for our own protection and the protection of our own sawmillers that we ask that Parliament shall allow this duty to be imposed, if necessary, because we do not know yet what the Commonwealth Parliament will do in reference to these duties. All we want is power to put the duty on timber in order to protect our sawmillers, and I therefore beg to move the second reading of this Bill. The Hon. Mr. T. KELLY .- I think this Bill is rather peculiar in its mode of drafting, con- sidering it is a Tariff Bill ; still, I recognise the difficulty the Government is in, and, under the circumstances, I consider they are fully justified in bringing in legislation in this direction-in putting an export duty on log timber. With regard to native raw material being taxed in this direction, I might say it is done all over the world where any country has a practical monopoly of any natural product, and an ex- port duty is levied in order to get a revenue from it, which the consumers of the raw mate- rial pay. This has been done with regard to nitrate of soda, which is a monopoly of Chili ; and also an export duty is put on guano, which is a special product of certain South American States. With regard to this timber duty, it is justifiable in this sense : that we have got the only timber that I know of that is admittedly the best for manufacturing butter-boxes, be- 
<page>1202</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1242</url>
is inodorous, while other timbers will not do for the purpose, as they taint the butter. Take kauri, for instance : if butter was put into kauri boxes it would be spoiled in a few weeks. Then, with regard to protecting our own work- men, the duty is put on our sawn and planed timber by the Commonwealth simply to protect their workmen at the cost of New Zealand workers, and I think it is only fair on our part that we should protect our own workmen in the same way that they wish to do. Therefore I think this Act is fully justified, and I would put the power into the hands of the Govern- mont to place an export duty on logs up to 3s. per 100 superficial feet, in order to en- courage the shipping of timber in its worked state, and thus extend the demand for manu- factured goods, or any reasonable imposition which may be considered necessary, as it is a well-ascertained fact that the butter-makers of Australia must procure New Zealand white- pine to make their butter-boxes for the export trade. Bill read the second and the third time. NELSON HARBOUR BOARD BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER said that the Government had endeavoured last year and this year to assist the Nelson Harbour Board as much as possible, and this Bill had received careful consideration this session at the hands of Parliament. The Nelson Harbour had cer- tain natural features, one being the Boulder Bank, and one of the proposals was that this should be cut through and an entrance made  through it. One clause of the Bill prevented the Harbour Board from doing anything with this bank unless the Minister of Marine was satisfied it was a safe thing to do. The proper provisions were inserted to allow the Governor in Council to interfere with any work the Har- bour Board was doing if it was considered to interfere with the interests of the harbour. These harbours were some of our biggest assets, and it was in the interest not only of the locality, but of everybody-not only of our- selves and our own shipping, but in the interest of the shipping of the world-that they should be improved and conserved as far as possible. It was therefore quite right that these powers should be inserted, in order to see that the most was made of our harbours, and that the money should not be wasted. He moved the second reading of the Bill. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN wished to know whether there was any member of the Council interested in this matter who could tell them something about it. The Hon. Mr. W. C. SMITH understood the Hon. Colonel Pitt, who was not present, was in favour of the Bill. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER knew he was in favour. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN said it looked like a local Bill, and he certainly wanted to know something about it before he voted for it. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER said it went before the Joint Committee on Bills, and they Hon. Mr. T. Kelly able gentleman call the Chatham Islands Bill a local Bill ? The Hon. Mr. BOWEN said, No ; but in this case it was difficult for members to get any in- formation on the question. There was no evi- dence taken, and nothing before the Council but the bare words of the Bill. Late as it was, he would like to hear, from some one living in the district who knew, the circumstances of the case. The Hon. Mr. REEVES must confess that, as far as he was personally concerned, he knew nothing whatever about it. It was one of those Bills that might well be sent to a Committee. However, it was a Bill which had come down from another Chamber, where it had been sub- mitted to the usual tests, and he believed the Bill so far was satisfactory. What he took its object to be was that the people of Motueka wanted to be taken out of the Nelson Harbour Board District and have a district of their own. That had been passed through the other House, and he believed that was all that was required. The Hon. Mr. JONES had made some in- quiries about this Bill in order that he might be able to vote on it, and he discovered that Motueka was in the original district, but that the money was going to be spent in Nelson, and the Motueka people naturally said, " If you are going to spend all the money in your district we do not want to be rated." So they would be cut out ; and he believed the members for the district were now satisfied with the arrangements made in the Bill. The Hon. Mr. T. KELLY only wished to re- mark that the Bill was submitted to the Joint Committee on Bills to ascertain whether it was a local or a public Bill. It was brought in by the Government as a public Bill, and some members of the other Chamber raised the question whether it was not a local Bill, and the Deputy-Speaker thereupon referred it to the Joint Committee on Bills to determine that question. It was fully discussed there in the presence of the members belonging to the localities affected, and the Committee finally determined that the Bill was in reality a public Bill, inasmuch as it affected colonia! interests with regard to the foreshore and certain Crown lands, and, as the Government approved of the Crown lands being taken for the purposes defined in the Bill, it was deemed by the Committee to be to all intents and pur- poses a public Bill. Bill read the second and the third time. NATIVE LAND CLAIMS ADJUSTMENT AND LAWS AMENDMENT BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER, in moving the second reading of this Bill, said it was im- possible for him, at that late hour of the nigh:, to explain every one of its clauses. He was informed, however, that there were good ard valid reasons for every one of them being passed. He could not say any more, except that he trusted the Council would look upon the matters drafted into the Bill as obligations of the Government for which the Bill was, so 10 
<page>1203</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1243</url>
pared to submit a reason for every one of the clauses so far as he could. He begged to move the second reading of the Bill. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN had no desire to put unnecessary difficulties in the way of even this hurried legislation, but they should have full information, especially in the case of Special Powers and Contracts Bills, for this was one of that species. It ought to have been sent to a Committee, considered clause by clause, and understood. It was impossible for anybody to find out without special information what the meaning of all the clauses were; they had to take them blindly on trust. The provisions might be just and necessary, but he was bound to say that he thought the present proceedings a most unfortunate way of doing business. The Hon. Mr. W. KELLY might state that this Bill was carrying out the recommenda- tions of the Native Affairs Committee of the other House, and some of the recommenda- tions of the Native Affairs Committee of the Council as well. He had looked over the Bill and found that many of the clauses had been recommended a number of years ago. He thought, as far as he could see, that there was nothing wrong with them. He had looked over the clauses which he knew something about, and supposed the others were inserted on the recommendation of the Chairman of the other Native Affairs Committee, who had told him (Mr. Kelly) that he had been over the Bill, and that practically all the clauses had He been recommended by the Committee. (Mr. Kelly) was personally acquainted with  some of the claims, and did not think there was any necessity for much explanation from the honourable gentleman in charge of the Bill. The Hon. Mr. JONES said, As far as be could see, one could only take this Bill entirely on trust. He did not and could not pretend to understand anything at all about it, and he did not think there was sufficient time left, even if the honourable gentleman in charge of the Bill thoroughly understood the clauses, for him to give a proper and sufficient explanation of them ; so that he (Mr. Jones) supposed that the only thing the Council could do, if they could not reject the Bill, was to accept it in good faith that it was all right. He was quite prepared to do that under the circumstances. The . Hon. Mr. T. KELLY said, In regard to this Bill, the usual course was to send such a Bill to the Native Affairs Committee ; but that was impossible now, as it would delay the whole work of the session. The only way in which they could deal with the Bill at the present time was to get an assurance from the Minister in charge that the clauses had been carefully looked over by the officers of the de- partment and by the Minister, and that they ought to be passed. He would like to get an assurance that these clauses had been properly investigated and that they ought to be passed by the Council. The Hon. Mr. TOMOANA wished to say a few words with reference to the Bill now before sary to say a great deal on this subject. As the Bill was in English he could not tell exactly what was in it, but he could see the names of the Natives mentioned, and he knew what they referred to. The Bill as a whole, referred to the petitions which had been sent in by the Natives, and which had been dealt with by both branches of Parliament, and he thought it was time some of these matters were settled. The Natives in most cases simply applied to be allowed to have their cases heard in the Native Land Court, and some of these applications had been dragging on before the other Chamber for some ten or twenty years, and they had never yet been settled. He thought they should pass the Bill as it was now. There were a great many reports on petitions which were originally embodied in this Bill, and which should have been left in, but they had been struck out in another place. He himself had a clause in which he was interested, carrying out the report of the Committee, and the Hon. Mr. Taiaroa had one also. These had been struck out, but they could not help that. They must put up with it for the present. He thought they should pass this Bill without making any amendments in it, because in each case the matter would go before the Judges for investigation. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER desired to say a few words in reply. In the first place, he wished to draw attention to the fact that a great many of these clauses were embodied in a Bill that the Council sent to the Native Affairs Com- mittee in- the year 1899. He had got a copy of it in his hand. It originated in the Legislative Council with his own name on the top of it. It was investigated by the Native Affairs Com- mittee, and it contained eighteen clauses, and these were now embodied in the present Bill. The Bill of 1899 never eventuated any further ; the other Chamber did not pass it. It was a fact that during five or six years these Native claims had been accumulating; and he only asked honourable gentlemen to look at the way in which these claims were put forward and the wording of them. There were very few of them which did more than this : to say that a Court might investigate the questions at issue. It would be wasting the time of the Council to read the Bill right through, but he would take a few of the clauses. The 3rd clause said that the Go- vernor might confer on the Court jurisdiction The next to inquire into certain matters. clause provided that the Appellate Court was empowered and directed to deal with any appeal which had been lodged against the de- cision of the Court in making the partition as if such appeal had been lodged in due time. Clause 5 stated, "The Court is hereby em- powered and directed to investigate and decide the claims of certain Natives." Clause 6 said, " It shall be lawful for the Governor, by Order in Council, to appoint a Royal Commis- sion to investigate and decide the claims of Wiremu Karaka te Aho and others " as to a block of land. Clause 7 provided that the 
<page>1204</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1244</url>
empowered to rehear and determine who were the Natives, if any, in addition to those named in the original titles, who were entitled to the same land. Clause 8 empowered the Court to inquire into the circumstances under which the Native owners executed transfers of portion of Waitakaruru No. 2 Block, et cetera. None of the clauses, so far as he had read them in the Bill, were clauses which absolutely de- termined the position of any man's property or interest in anything. They were all in- tended to enable the proper tribunals to in- quire into purchases which had not been finally or satisfactorily settled. Therefore they were not in any way taking away private rights, as some people might seem to think. More than that, as he had said before, eighteen of the clauses the Council had decided two years ago and embodied in a Bill, which had passed the Council after going through careful investi- gation in the Native Affairs Committee. He therefore asked the Council to read the Bill a second time. Bill read the second and the third time. MANAWATU RAILWAY SALE AND PUR- CHASE EMPOWERING BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- Sir, I am quite certain that everybody who has studied the requirements of this part of the North Island must have come to the conclusion that the sooner the Manawatu Railway is pur- chased by the Government the better, and that this Bill provides for a possible solution of that matter is very much to be taken as an augury of better management. I do not blame the company in this respect, because they have had to study the question of ways and means ; but #cc-zero I am quite certain that a great many things have happened in connection with this railway which would not have been permitted by the management of the Government lines. On the other hand, I believe there were many things that the Government railways might be im- proved by if the Government were to acquire that railway, and complete what, I think, should be the absolute policy of our colony- namely, that all the railways should be held by the State for the good of the people, and be worked in their interest. I beg to move the second reading of the Bill. Bill read the second and the third time. # PUBLIC WORKS BILL. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 2. - Compensation on widening of street. The Hon. Mr. REEVES moved, That the proviso to this clause be struck out. The Committee divided on the question, " That the words proposed to be omitted stand part of the clause." AYES, 4. Bolt Jones Bowen Kelly, T. Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker Gourley Swanson Twomey Walker, W. C. Tomoana Reeves Rigg Majority against, 3. Proviso struck out. Bill reported, and read the third time. VICTORIA COLLEGE SITE BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- Sir. I am sure the Council will be glad to know that an arrangement has been come to by which a very good site indeed has been secured for the Victoria College-a very much better site than that about which so much fuss was made some time ago, because the first thing that would have had to be done would be to go in for a lot of dynamite in order to blow the bricks up. It will be noted that if the trustees can possibly arrange for certain grounds for the Victoria College Council, they will only be required to pay whatever the land is assessed at. The other arrangements are perfectly equal, and there will be no difficulty about them if the two bodies are willing to exchange lands. The first thing is that the Wellington Hospital Trustees, who are, so to speak, interested in the exchange, have to be reimbursed out of the Consolidated Fund for the value of the land. I do not think there is anything else cf importance in the Bill that I need menti. except clause 4, which provides that the build- ings on the site of the land taken shall be com- menced within two years of the passing of the Act. I trust the passing of this Bill will mean that such a sum will be placed on the supple- mentary estimates passed to-night as will re 3 very good guarantee that the buildings will he commenced, and that all the conditions wil be fulfilled. I move the second reading of the Bill. The Hon. Mr. REEVES .- Sir, I wish to say a few words on this Bill. I had a notice of motion in connection with the same thing, but. in deference to the wishes of honourable mem- bers, I am not going to bring my motion for- ward at this late stage of the session. I wish to say this, however : that when we come back here again-if we are spared-we will be co further forward with this matter than we are now. I am perfectly certain about it : and I may say this : that Wellington is not a proper place for an institution of this kind. F.r a university you want to get a place away in m the turmoil and the influence of a commerci city like this. I say now, as I have said on que or two occasions before, that Wellington is cot the place for the Victoria College. There are other places in the university district that I- far more adapted to the purpose than Welling- ton ; and having the university on the top of a range will be neither ornamental nor useful. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN .- I hope that this Bill will lead to a settlement of the question. but I should have been very glad if my hon. ...:- able friend had been able to guarantee that there will not be another row over the site before it is finally settled. With regard to 
<page>1205</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1245</url>
Reeves, I would remind him that the students of the university of New Zealand are not as a rule able to reside at a distance from their homes to get university teaching. No doubt the ideal place for a university college is one where all the students would be resident, and where they would be, as the honourable gentle- man suggested, outside of the turmoil of a great town; but it has been found necessary even in the Old Country to found universities at the centres of population, where the students can attend the lectures regularly. It will take a great many years before there are here a number of young people able to devote them- selves to university study at a distance from their own homes. For that reason I think it will be necessary for a long time to come to have our universities and colleges at places where there is the largest population near the schools. However, I am glad that some hope is held out for agreeing, in Wellington at least, as to a site for the university. I confess I should like to feel more certain than I do. The Hon. Mr. JONES .- Sir, this Bill says that the Mayor and citizens of the City of Wel- lington are empowered to do certain things, the Victoria College Council have power to do certain things, and the Wellington Hospital Trustees may do certain things. Well, those things could have been done before without a Bill. The bodies mentioned could have come to a decision to make the exchanges without any Bill, and a Bill could have been introduced afterwards to give effect to their decisions. I  would like, however, to ask the honourable gentleman whether he is at liberty to tell us the result of the negotiations which took place be- tween the Premier and the Victoria College Governors and the City Council. I hope that this Bill means that some definite arrangement was arrived at-that we are not merely passing the Bill in the hope that something may turn up to enable a decision to be come to. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- I suppose the honourable gentleman refers to the Con- ference held yesterday. Well, I was not pre- sent at the Conference, and do not know what happened, and so cannot be expected to say what took place. I believe, however, there was a modus vivendi arrived at, and I have no doubt if the people of Wellington are sensible-which I admit they often are not-they will assist each other in seeing that the institution thrives in the way similar institutions do in other towns. I am sorry to say the Wellington public is very acrimonious and cantankerous, but the Govern- ment cannot help that. All we want to do is to give them a fair show, and I think this Bill gives them a fair show. If they will only try to act, as most people do, in the best interests of their town, there ought to be no difficulty between these bodies. The Government was asked to empower them to do this, and has done so; and the only body that in any shape or form requires compensation is the Hospital Trustees, and that is specially provided for from the Consolidated Fund on the valuation of the General Assessor. I think, therefore, the whole it will prove satisfactory. Bill read the second and the third time. RESERVES AND OTHER LANDS SALE, DISPOSAL, AND ENABLING AND PUB- LIC BODIES EMPOWERING BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER, in moving the second reading of this Bill, said it was one of those Bills which was periodically necessary. It was a Bill that represented a great many old questions, there not having been a Bill of the kind brought forward for some years. He had very carefully looked into it in Cabinet in the first place, and it had been thoroughly sifted in the other Chamber. Bill read the second and the third time. DUNEDIN CITY AND SUBURBAN TRAM- WAYS BILL. The Hon. Mr. BOLT said, the Bill was for the purpose of granting in a small way a fur- ther extension of the powers given to the Dunedin City Corporation under the City Tramways Act of last year. That Act gave the Corporation power to borrow £200,000 for the purpose of purchasing the property of the Tramways Company and establishing a new system of trams. The purchase had been made by the Corporation for a sum of £43,000. The estimated cost of the new system, together with other expenses, amounted in all to about £192,000, leaving a sum of $8,000, which might not be sufficient to meet extra expenses anticipated, and this Bill enabled the Corpora- tion to obtain such sum as might be necessary to do so. He moved the second reading of the Bill. Bill read the second and the third time. PUBLIC WORKS BILL. A message was received from the House of Representatives, forwarding the following reasons for disagreeing with the Council's amendments in this Bill :- "1. That the Bill is intended to remedy great loss, inconvenience, and hardship, which is being suffered by numbers of property- owners by reason of the provisions of sec- tion 21 of 'The Public Works Acts Amend- ment Act, 1900'; and also to prevent the unsightly appearance which streets will pre- sent if that section remains unaltered. "2. That the amendments of the Legislative Council, if agreed to, would result in the con- tinuance of the evils above referred to." The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER moved, That the Council doth not insist on its amendments. Motion negatived. The Hon. Mr. REEVES moved, That the Hon. Messrs. Rigg, Gourley, and himself be appointed a Committee to draw up reasons for insisting. Motion agreed to. Subsequently, The Hon. Mr. REEVES brought up the fol- lowing reasons, and moved, That they be agreed to :- "The proviso struck out would, if passed, 
<page>1206</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1246</url>
authority in connection with the widening of streets." Motion agreed to. Subsequently, A message was received from the House of Representatives agreeing to the Council's amendments in this Bill. # APPROPRIATION BILL. This Bill was read the first and the second time. On the question, " That the Bill be read the third time," The Hon. Mr. REEVES said, In the supple- mentary estimates there is a sum of £400 odd for the Commissioners going to Australia. Now, I do not for one moment cavil at that. I think it is quite right that it should be paid, but I want to draw the attention of the Council to a most peculiar thing with regard to Royal Commissioners. A member of Parliament, if appointed to a Royal Commission, receives only £1 per day. A gentleman outside Parlia- ment appointed on a Royal Commission re- ceives £3 3s. a day. I think the thing is simply absurd, and should be rectified. It is absurd to expect a member of Parliament to go about the country on a Royal Commission at £1 per day. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- I have no difficulty in replying to the honourable gentle- man if this is the only criticism he has to direct against the present Appropriation Bill. The Hon. Mr. REEVES .- It is not against it. I am not saying a word against it.  The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- I know that ; but the honourable gentleman is reflect- ing against the scrupulous conscience of Parlia- ment for the past fifteen or twenty years, which has absolutely prevented or hindered their own members from taking positions and giving to the State their proper services on certain occa- sions. I have always contended, from the first day I entered public life, that the most miser- able thing any Parliament can do is to brand its public men with the brand of covetousness. Most countries are only too glad to get the ser- vices of these men if they are worthy at all- to get them without money and without price. They want them; but New Zealand seems to think that they only want the rich men, who can afford to gallivant about on Commissions, and lose money, if they choose to do so, for the honour and the glory of it. But that is not business. No man in business would do that sort of thing; but it was all brought about, I believe, in a peculiar way. A certain member of Parliament got into trouble about a certain contract, and a Bill was imme- diately brought in which disqualified for ever afterwards any member of Parliament being appointed to a Royal Commission except at the miserable payment of a guinea a day, although his brother Commissioners may be getting three guineas a day. That has been a great draw- back. We have had very important Commis- sions this year, and I may say the work of some of those Commissions has been exceptionally Hon. Mr. Reeves my own department, the School Teachers' Salaries Commission. We were there face to face with a question which dealt in its utmost intimacy with every part of the colony, with the minds of the Boards, with the minds of the teachers, and with the interests of edu- cation generally, which vary in every part of the colony; we set up a Commission which was to go round and gauge all these different opinions, and focus them in such a way that Parliament should be convinced that there was only one way of doing it-namely, by making a colonial scale of salaries. We were extremely fortunate in the gentlemen who occupied seats on that Commission. We had members of Parliament ; we had members and Chairmen of Education Boards; we had School Inspectors, and we had school-teachers-every class was represented, and I do not think there was really a vital interest ignored. Because, while Westland and Greymouth was not strictly represented, we appointed the Secretary from the Westland Education District, and we were exceedingly fortunate in getting so able a young man as Mr. Morten, to whom we owe a great debt for the work which he did. And I am very glad indeed we were able to express to him our recognition of his valuable services. The members of that Commission who were not members of Parliament got three guineas a day. Members of Parliament could only draw £1 a day. That, Sir, is very unfair indeed ; but still that is a fault of Parliament, being sc sensitive as to the -I do not know that I should call it the good fame of its members, but I might call it a super-scrupulosity. I think it is a most ignominious brand upon the honour and honesty of every member of Parliament to have such an Act on the statute-book. I have always protested against it. We now come to another Commission -- the Federation Commission. That Commission was of an exceptional nature. It covered a great deal of ground ; it had to travel a great dis- tance, and it had to cross the sea. I happened to meet with a very high authority indeed, and he told me that in his experience it was the only Commission which had never exceeded the original term of its natural life, which shows how well that Commission attended to its duties. It had so many days, weeks. ard months in which to report, and it brought down its report within the original time sei forth in the first Commission, which is a very rare thing indeed, I can assure the Counad. That Commission was placed in a very peculiar position. Of course, we know what happens in New Zealand. There are the disabilities of members of Parliament ; and I trust the Cour- cil will consider with me that it would have been very wrong and shortsighted if members of Parliament had not been on that Commis- sion, for we should then have lost the services of the Hon. Mr. Bowen. We should also have lost the services of the Chairman, Colonel Prit. Why should not those gentlemen be recoupd and paid just as well as anybody else ? That Commission travelled across the seas, and they 
<page>1207</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1247</url>
Adelaide, and, I think, Brisbane. It is no use minority of one, which was very " hard lines " talking about how they were treated. We all -but still he had no doubt, when there had know with what hospitality representatives of been a little more time for reflection, and if this colony would be treated in every one of he lived to bring the measure forward again, the places I have mentioned ; and were they to some of those who had acted, perhaps, without remain an impecunious and unresponsive body the fullest consideration of the reasons he had of gentlemen, who might be considered not of given for voting for the measure, would alter the highest class? We expect our Commis- their minds. He begged to move, That the sioners, when they go abroad, to live like repro- Council do now adjourn. sentatives, and to be able to pay their way; and I think it was understood that in sending the thanks of this Council were due to the Hon. those gentlemen their expenses in Australia the Minister for the very considerate and able would be considered. I am sure that both way he had conducted the business of the Go- those Commissions - the Teachers' Salaries vernment in the Council. Commission and the Federation Commission - have performed services which the colony ought ment that by stating that, as a rule, he was in to thank them for, and esteem as absolutely accord with the Hon. the Minister. Of course, above money and above price. They have done on one occasion there was a little difference of a valuable service for their country. They have opinion between them, and he humbly sub- mitted he was right on that occasion. How- cleared up ground which some people were almost afraid to touch. In the case of the ever, he hoped they would get on as cordially Federation Commission some people were afraid next session as this one. to touch the question. They thought, if they did, they would tumble down the whole com- was one of those who was not ordinarily sup- mercial condition of the colony, as if it were posed to support the present Government, he built on the top of a pack of cards ; whereas the had very great pleasure in testifying to the Commission went straight to the mark, and courtesy displayed by the honourable gentle- found out what was the position of affairs, and man towards all members of his party, for brought up a very solid report indeed. I am which he was very much obliged. He supported obliged to the Hon. Mr. Reeves for bringing the Minister when he was right, and voted against him when he was wrong ; but he would forward this matter, and I consider that when like to see him a little more Liberal from his members of Parliament-who should be men of known character and experience-are appointed point of view. on Royal Commissions they should be paid as much as any other gentleman. The Hon. Mr. REEVES .- As a matter of (Friday). personal explanation, I gathered from what the Hon. the Minister said that he was under the impression that I was not in favour of reasonable expenses being allowed to the Royal HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Commissioners. I tried to explain in my few remarks that there was nothing of the kind in my mind, because no one has a greater appreciation of the work done by the First Readinga-Second Reading-Third Reading- Federation Commissioners and the Education Commissioners than I have. I contend they have done their duty well and faithfully, and the paltry sum that has been placed on the estimates to pay them for their extra expenses, to my mind, is not enough. I did not say a word against it, and I only trust the Govern- ment will take steps to further increase the allowances to Royal Commissioners. Bill read the third time. ADJOURNMENT. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER said, At the last stage of this eventful history, which was to ring the curtain down, he only desired to thank honourable members of the Council for the consideration they had given him in the conduct of the Council's business. He had endeavoured to do his best, and if he had o'clock. given any satisfaction at all in the conduct of the business, it had only been because the members of the Council had been exceedingly generous to him, and had always supported his .endeavours-he would not say his measures, The Hon. Mr. PINKERTON would say that The Hon. Mr. T. KELLY would also supple- The Hon. Mr. PEACOCK said, Although he Motion agreed to. The Council adjourned at three o'clock p.m. Thursday, 7th November, 1901. Primary Education Reserves-A Correction- Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill- Timber Export Bill-Factories Bill-Nelson Har- bour Board Bill-Victoria College Site Bill- Death of the Hon. J. A. Bonar, M.L.C .- Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Bill-Re- serves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill- Midland Railway -- Victoria College Site Bill- Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Bill -Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill- Midland Railway-Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Empowering Bill-Public Works Bill- Flax Grading and Export Bill-Victoria College Site Bill-Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill - North of Auckland Railway -Supply - Public Works Bill-Appropriation Bill-Public Works Bill-Business of the Session-Adjourn- ment. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER took the chair at eleven PRAYERS. FIRST READINGS. Light-line Railways Bill, Land Bill. 
<page>1208</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1248</url>
Maori Councils Bill. THIRD READING. Maori Councils Bill. PRIMARY EDUCATION RESERVES. On the motion of Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands), it was resolved, That this House approves of the lands proposed to be reserved as endow- ments for primary education, as classified in Paper No. 256 of 1901, being permanently set aside as endowments to primary education. # A CORRECTION. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) asked per- mission to make a correction by way of personal explanation. When he was discussing the meat- export trade some time ago he alluded to classi- fication and standard. His argument was in- tended to show that the Wellington brand stood as high in the North Island as the Eclipse brand did in the South, but in the Hansard report he was made to use the term " faulty grading " instead of "error in description " when referring to a quotation from the Aus- tralian Pastoralists' Review relative to a case of claim. The question of faulty grading was not at all involved in the point he was bringing out, and he could not understand why the term "faulty grading " was reported. It had since been explained to him that the claim to which he alluded was made simply because the mar- ket value of meat had fallen, and it was another instance of the impropriety of the method of assessing adopted in the Old Country. He thought it was only just to the Wellington Meat Export Company that he should make this clear. He could perfectly well understand how the claim came to be made, and, until the present wretched mode of assessing was re- formed, whenever a decline in market oc- curred c.i.f. sales would always be subject to the same injustice, and the primest standard qualities might be declared to be not up to standard, and the reputation of any company might suffer. RESERVES AND OTHER LANDS SALE, DISPOSAL, AND ENABLING, AND PUB- LIC BODIES EMPOWERING BILL. A message was received from His Excellency the Governor transmitting a draft of this Bill, which was referred to Committee of the Whole, agreed to, and reported to the House. On the question, That the resolution be agreed to, Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay) said, Before the question was put he thought it was right that the Premier or some other Minister should assure the House that they would make themselves responsible for the propriety- "honesty " was almost the proper word-of the provisions in the Bill. It was quite im- possible for the House at any time to know that all the numerous alterations, additions, and changes, consequent upon such a Bill as this, were fair and proper. He only raised the ques- tion in its general aspect, that the responsi- Bill such as this, with large powers and great ramifications involved in it. Before the B :. passed he thought they ought to have the as ur ance from some particular Minister that th- departmental officers had approved the varicz. clauses of the Bill, and were absolutely certa of the propriety of its passing, so that if ar misfeasance was discovered after the Bill b. passed the responsibility would be taken fre honourable members and placed on the Miras. ters. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) desired to saveL most of the clauses of the Bill had been bei ... the House for a very long period, and it Az some years since they had had a Bill of tb :. nature. Ministers had carefully gone threat every clause in the Bill. Of course, the. might be local circumstances which it was i. possible for them to know; but most of th clauses were the result of petitions that ba! been presented to the House, and the Bill ga .. effect to recommendations made to the (- vernment. In this and every other meas ... that was introduced by the Government Mic- ters must accept a certain amount of respas bility. When going through the Bill. if mer. bers had a doubt about any clause, or wo! ! opinion that any clause was unjust or ing .. table, the Government would not press :!- passage of any clause that required forb .: consideration. To have a separate Bil 5: every one of the clauses in this Bill would !e an undue loading of the statute-book, and 1 some instances private members, if they in .:: - duced the necessary Bills for the clauses 5 .... ing their own district, would have little pro-g. : of getting them through. He could only se this, as far the Government were concern :. that there was nothing in this Bill, so it - Ministers knew, the passage of which would . detrimental to the colony. Resolution agreed to, and Bill read a :: time. TIMBER EXPORT BILL. Mr. MILLS (Commissioner of Trade :"? Customs) .- Sir, in moving the second red .:: of this important Bill at this late bour ef .. session it will be impossible for me to give it amount of information I would like to [ .. before the House so that the members r . fully understand the position of the tic: industry of this colony, and how necessary i for us to have a judicious conservation of : timber at the same time that we carry on i large timber industry. There is no ans: - policy question that can be entertained a : thought out by this House than the que : of the timber interests of this colony, and I quite sure that every member must agree that : is one of our largest and most valuable patiti assets. The Government have for some : ! " considered it necessary, in the interest of tin conservation, to have a measure passed wt. will, at any rate, prohibit the raw mat!" leaving this colony to be worked up in ot ..: : places. During the past month a temr-rit measure has been passed by the Parliam .:: 
<page>1209</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1249</url>
likely to materially interfere with the timber direct by regulation, and such notice shall be industry of this colony. The Government given not less than twenty-four hours prior to therefore called a Conference of the sawmillers shipment. "(2.) If any such timber is shipped without -the men who had the necessary experience we all wish to acquire-and they were unani- such notice being given, the master shall be mous that the day had arrived when an export liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds." I intend when in Committee to ask the duty should be placed on the raw material- Committee to make an alteration in subsec- that is, on the round logs that have not passed through the mill, or logs squared with the axe tion (2) of this clause. I intend to ask the Com- I think many honourable members mittee to strike out the word "shall." and or saw. will be well aware that during the short space insert "and agent shall each," and to strike of some fifty years, which is only a small item out the words "exceeding fifty " and insert in the history of a young nation, a great quan- "less than ten." In reading it over finally I tity of our timber has been felled, or burned came to the conclusion that it would not do through bush - fires, the forests are being to fix a maximum amount of penalty, for this quickly devastated, and the day is rapidly ap- reason : We could not possibly tell what might happen. If a large ship called into any of the proaching when we shall find there is very little timber suitable for sawmilling purposes northern ports or bays and loaded up with left in this colony -- that is, at any rate, timber timber, the captain might leave the colony, of a certain class. I may say in this con- preferring not to pay any duty, but simply to nection that last year we exported nearly pay the penalty imposed by the Bill. There- 60,000,000 ft., besides there being a very large fore it was thought advisable that it should read as I have indicated. Clause 4 refers to home consumption. Now, the effect of the temporary measure passed by the Common- the passing of export entries. Clause 5 con- wealth would be, under such a tariff, to take tains provision for making the necessary all the raw material in the form of logs from regulations, and in the last line I intend New Zealand over to Australia and have it to ask the Committee to strike out the words sawn up there, which, no doubt, would be a "exceeding ten " and insert "less than five," so that the minimum amount will be the great injury to our timber industry, and throw out of employment a very large number of our fine, unless under circumstances respecting working-classes. Last year a fairly large im- which the Magistrate, or whoever may ad- port of timber was noted through the Customs, judicate on the matter, considers the offence but it is timber of a different class from what would necessitate a larger penalty. In regard we have here, all hardwood, and it is a matter to the Schedule, we have had great difficulty in of necessity to import it. Honourable mem- arriving at what we wanted to define, because, bers will have seen that a resolution has been as those interested in the trade are aware, it is passed by the Commonwealth Parliament, and difficult to define what is a log, especially when will understand what the result of their deli- you know that a saw has touched it. If you berations mean to the timber industry of the go to a sawmill and find large pieces of sawn timber, some 12 in. by 12 in. or 12 in. by 20 in., colony. I need not detain the House any fur- ther, although, as I have already remarked, the Customhouse officer might naturally say it there are many items of importance I should was a log, while the sawmiller might say it like to have placed on record in reference to this was only part of a log; so that it is difficult to arrive at a proper definition. There is also great industry, because it is one I have always some difficulty in arriving at the definition of felt a personal interest in, and I believe there "flitches." In conversation with those saw- is no greater question that could occupy the millers who attended the Timber Conference attention of this Parliament than the judicious working and conservation of our forests. The I found that there was a division of opinion Bill as introduced is not a very lengthy one. in regard to this matter, while they were In clause 2 it says, - unanimous in asking the Government to bring in a measure to provide an export duty of "The Governor may at any time, by Order in not less than 3s. on the logs. Members Council, cause to be levied, collected, and paid will therefore see the matter is left an open at the Customs to His Majesty, previous to question, to be fixed later on by regula- exportation from New Zealand, the duties upon tions. Some of the northern sawmillers who timber as set forth in the Schedule hereto." had large interests, such as Mr. Gibbons and It was deemed by the Government not to be Mr. Mitchelson, have written saying they advisable at the present time to ask the House think this ought to be done, and the Govern- to fix a certain amount of export duty. It was ment wish to meet them in a reasonable way. considered in the interests of the industry, that At the same time we have to study the effect of as at present the tariff passed by the Australian the Commonwealth tariff, which at present is Commonwealth was merely a tentative measure, almost prohibitive. In the first part of the it would be better to have an elastic Bill in this Schedule, where it says, " Or such higher duty, form. Clause 3 is as follows : - not exceeding 5s. per 100 superficial feet, as the Governor by Order in Council determines," I in- " (1.) The master or agent of every ship in tend to move that that be struck out, and the which it is intended to ship for export timber same proviso as in the second part of the Sche- liable to duty shall give notice to the Collector dule inserted-namely, " Or such lesser duty as or other proper officer of Customs of such in- ! 
<page>1210</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1250</url>
That would fix the maximum rate. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Why should the maximum be fixed in one case and not in another ? Mr. MILLS .- It is fixed on logs because all the sawmillers and every one of experience in the timber industry are quite satisfied that the day has arrived when we ought not to let logs leave the colony to be worked up in Aus tralia, to the detriment of the working-classes. We are satisfied that 3s. on 100 superficial feet will be sufficient for export duty, combined with the heavier freight that is charged on logs. In the latter part of the Schedule, where it states, " Or such lesser duty as the Governor by Order in Council determines," the House will realise why this position is made on a sliding scale, so that we can finally adjust matters to suit the industry of this colony. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay). - It seems to me there are three great principles involved in the consideration of this Bill. In the first place, as was pointed out by the member for Palmerston last night, the Go- vernor's message is dated one week ago. A great principle first of all presents itself to my mind, that the message has been detained in transit for one week, and the only conception one can have is that it was intentionally de- layed, so that those members who, like myself, hold strong opinions on the subject of free- trade and protection should not have the op- portunity of discussing the matter as it ought to be discussed. That a Bill involving a great  principle should be brought down to the House when everybody is fagged out, and every one shows signs of impatience at any member who speaks at any length, is an infringement of principle to begin with. The second principle, which seems to me to be of very great import- ance, is whether it is desirable under any circumstances to impose an export duty ; and, though the Minister in addressing himself to the Bill has spoken of the Commonwealth tariff being of such and such a nature, the honourable gentleman knows, and should have called the attention of the House to the fact, that the Commonwealth tariff is in suspense, and that there is really no true Commonwealth tariff at all. Mr. MILLS .- I said so. Captain RUSSELL .- Well, I did not follow the Minister sufficiently closely to know that he had done so; but, at any rate, this Bill smacks of the nature of a retaliatory measure, and, the people of New Zealand being sincerely anxious to enter into reciprocal treaties with Australia, it is dangerous, before the Common. wealth tariff is assured, to place a measure on our statute-book that could only appear in- tended as a retaliatory measure. But there is another principle which also is of great import- ance, and probably is of more importance than the other two, and that is that we are depart- ing altogether from the true constitutional principle when we allow that the Governor in Council may from time to time, when he thinks fit, impose a duty on any industry; and not Mr. Mills exactly as he thinks fit. Mr. MILLS .- The maximum and minimum are stated in the Bill. Captain RUSSELL .- Quite so; but within the maximum and minimum the Governer in Council may fix such duties as he pleases. That appears to me to be a principle that is absolutely monstrous. At the present time we have a (Government with distinctive protective proclivities, and they may advise His Ex- cellency to impose the highest possible duties. but next we may have a free-trade Government. who might advise His Excellency to abolish the duty altogether, or to reduce it to the lowest possible amount, and that without any consultation with the people of the colony. There are thus three important principles it- volved in this Bill, and I think it is wrong. under the circumstances, that it should be brought down, or allowed to proceed. Once more I wish to emphasize the fact that fer one whole week the Bill has been held in abeyance ; and if there was any intentinc of allowing a debate to take place on the Bill and allowing the people of the colony through the Press to know of the provisions of the Bill, it should have been circulated at least a week ago, so as to allow the country to know what policy was being proposed. I am deter- mined to vote against the second reading of the Bill, and in Committee I shall endeavour to get it so amended as will not leave the power in the hands of His Excellency in Council to raise or lower or abolish altogether the duty, a prit .- ciple which I think is injurious to constitu- tional government. I may also add that time Minister, in addressing himself to the B :. alluded to the fact that he had been in com- munication with the sawmillers throughont the country. That should not weigh with honourable members at all. We are not here to legislate in the interest of sawmillers. c. any other industry, but for the welfare of the colony generally. Sir J. G. WARD (Postmaster-General) .- The honourable gentleman complains of the de !:: in introducing this Bill. If the honourable member and those who think with him would try to realise the situation, and consider west it is that has induced the Government to b. 'i back this measure to the very last moment. :... ; will understand why it is not proposed in this Bill to impose a direct import duty on tin: .: at once, but to have it held in abeyance. Te- whole reason for the delay in the introductor. of the Bill has been that we might ascert ..:: what is to be done by the Federal Government, who, though they announced their tariff - nie weeks ago, have not yet got it into Comm.die in the Federal Parliament. Captain RUSSELL .- It will not be in fone for three months. Sir J. G. WARD .- That is all the more reasto why we should take the course proposed it: c.r .- nection with this matter, so that we ein sc: during the recess if necessary. The timer t- dustry of New Zealand is a very important cfu. Hundreds of thousands of pounds are invested 
<page>1211</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1251</url>
export business in timber to Australia for many years past has been one of considerable im- portance to that industry; and the sudden blocking-out of our timber from Australia would be of material moment to the sawmill proprie- tors and their employés, to say nothing of many other industries affected by it, and it would un- doubtedly affect a great many men employed in New Zealand. Very well ; supposing that as a result of the representation going on at pre- sent in Australia between those largely engaged in the timber industry and the Federal Go- vernment, it should be decided to reduce the Australian duty, or not to put on this duty against New Zealand timber at all if we were, now to impose a fixed export duty we should be like a ship at sea without a rudder-we could do nothing but collect the duty. We have held back this Bill in the hope that something would be done in Australia. I have myself had cable correspondence with people in Australia for some weeks past, which correspondence I am not in a position to give publicity to at the present time, but I can say they are working strongly to prevent that duty which has been foreshadowed by the Federal Government being imposed on timber. Therefore it behoves the Government to take such measures as will enable them in, so to speak, an elastic way to meet circumstances that may arise and which at the moment they cannot possibly foresee. The honourable member said it was not desirable to impose an export duty. I quite agree with him in that respect if our  industry could be carried on without it ; but we have had the representatives of the sawmilling industry from Auckland to the Bluff meeting in I would urge that the very fact of our asking Wellington and going into the situation, and they have unanimously recommended that an export duty on logs should be imposed by the colony in order to enable them to carry on this important branch of their business. An Hon. MEMBER. - They must take our white-pine. Sir J. G. WARD .- Yes ; but the point is, act of retaliation. I am strongly opposed to Are we going to allow our logs to be sent across to the other side, and the whole of the work in interests of this industry. We ask power to connection with the cutting-up of those logs to pass from this colony, and allow the expendi- ture of a large sum of money to be taken out of our colony and away from our own work- men, and to pass into the hands of those in another country ? An Hon. MEMBER .- This is making it worse ; able member says that the power of variation it makes the timber dearer. Sir J. G. WARD .- The honourable member a monstrous thing. must see that, if there is an export duty on logs, it will be necessary to saw up the white- lency power to raise or to lower the duty. pine here, and those who purchase the sawn pine will, if Australia does not reduce its duty, have to pay more for it to make up the export duty we put on. That is what we are endea- vouring to do. We want, under the altered circumstances, to get this important industry on the best footing possible for the colony ; but at the same time we do not want to drive the industry to Australia, and have our logs cut up there for butter- boxes, instead Now, the honourable member says that this is intended to be some kind of a retaliatory measure. I, for one, should be very sorry to see the country adopt in any shape or form a retaliatory measure against Australia owing to it having brought down a tariff of Customs duties for the Commonwealth against the world. We have yet to see what the destinies of Australia and New Zealand may require to be done in the interests of our respective countries, and, if the Australian statesmen have found it necessary to adopt a policy of pro- tection on timber, I do not for one moment believe that they have done so, as is suggested by some people, merely as an act of antagonism towards this country. That would be a very undesirable course for them to follow, and any- thing but statesmanlike, and I do not believe they have done so. I say, in turn, that, re- specting this colony, its destiny in many respects is still in the unknown future, and that there may be many requirements of our own that at present we cannot foresee to be considered. I say there are circumstances that may, and probably will, arise which will pos- sibly override the minor considerations of a policy such as this, and that it ought to be the desire of public men both here and in Aus- tralia to originate, instead of acts of retaliation, something which will consummate between the countries a bond of union ; and our aim, as far as fiscal matters are concerned, should be the reciprocation in respect to articles of export suited to both countries, and that we should do in that respect what is for the benefit of all. That is what I believe should be our object, and that the Governor in Council should have power to impose these duties if necessary shows that we are not desirous of adopting a retaliatory course, and that if we were now to take fright or be alarmed by the action of our friends across the water we should impose an export duty definitely now. That might be said to be an such a course. What we are doing is in the impose certain duties if that should become necessary, and if negotiation and conference should show that we must do something to pro- tect that industry. If that, unhappily, should be the only course left to us, then some system of export duty should be adopted. The honour- in the duties from 3s. to 5s., or less than 3s., is Captain RUSSELL .- To leave His Excel- Sir J. G. WARD .- It is not His Excellency the Governor-it is the Governor in Council. The honourable member knows perfectly well that this would only be done by the Governor upon the advice of responsible Ministers, and the responsible Ministers are not going to give effect to that unless it appears to them as responsible Ministers to be desirable. It cannot be said, as was urged by one honourable member, that this is putting into the hands of 
<page>1212</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1252</url>
away from the people the liberties which they ought to possess. I say that if the country, under these circumstances, having made pro- vision for possible action during the recess owing to matters which are vet being devised by the Federal Government - I say that, under the circumstances, you can do nothing less in order to meet this situation than to give effect to a proposal of this kind, and leave it to the Governor in Council to act -either to reduce the duty below 3s. per 100 ft., or to increase it beyond 3s., but not over 5s., if that is necessary and desirable, to secure to this country a portion of the business, which I think honourable gentlemen will see is for the well- being of a great industry. That brings me to the last point to which I wish to refer. The honourable gentleman says this has been done without consultation, as far as the people of the colony are concerned. Now, the honourable member will at once admit that, if you want to consult the people of the colony as to what should be done in a fiscal emergency of this cha- racter, it will be necessary for a referendum to be submitted to the people; but when we have the members of the House of Representatives met, as they are, when we are in a position to take their judgment and to follow a course such as this, if it seems right when that course has been adopted, I do not think it can really be said that the people of the colony have not been con- sulted. The representatives of the people have their responsibilities on behalf of their people. And no one can gainsay the fact that the leaders of this industry, the men who are most inti- mately associated with it, after carefully con- sulting together, and with a responsible Minister present-no one can say they are not in a position to advise on the situation. My honour- able friend the Minister of Customs attended during the Conference, when the situation was put before him by those who naturally desire no improper interference with or injury to the industry. The sawmill-owners, the proprietors of the mills-the men of most experience in this industry-would not have unanimously recommended the adoption of something that would be inimical to the sawmilling industry and disastrous to the men employed in it, and therefore ruinous so far as the industry itself is concerned. I can assure members of the House that the only reason we have for asking that this power should be taken for the Governor in Council is to insure, under circumstances that are unique and that have yet to be determined after action is taken by the Federal Council, that then a course should be taken one way or the other that will be most in the interests of this colony. I do not think any better way than the one proposed could be suggested ; but if any honourable member has a better way, then. I say, in the interests of the country, we shall be too glad to receive his suggestions. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) .- I regret I am not able to see the matter in quite the same view as that in which the honourable member has approached it. I feel that at the present time it would be a great mistake on the part of Sir J. G. Ward tate those on the other side. Any of us can see from the discussions that there is much debate as to what should be done, although at the present moment the majority in the Federal Parliament favour a system of protection. But, considering how important it is to us to keep on the friendliest possible terms, I say we should not show even any temporary irritation at what is proposed. I think that is the correct method to follow. If I had time I could enlarge upon the subject, but will not now do so. Mr. MONK (Waitemata). - With previous speakers, Iapprove of the remarks of the honour. able member for Hawke's Bay, Captain Rus- sell. I very much regret that we have not had more notice of the measure being brough: down. I am aware that it, was talked of some time ago, but I thought the subject had passed away, and that we were to hear no more about it. From the remarks which have been made on this Bill, one would imagine that the control of the timber business of Australia was in the hands of our sawmillers; whereas the export from New Zealand forms a very important part indeed to us, but a comparatively small part of the timber imports into Australia. This move- ment seems to me almost too insignificant to call for special attention on the part of the Australian statesmen. I would also remind the honourable gentleman that a very large number of gentlemen in Australia are opposing the duty which is proposed by the Common- wealth, and the important Kauri Timber Com- pany of the North, which is almost entirely owned by gentlemen in Australia. You may depend upon it that what influence can be brought to bear upon the Government there will be brought by those gentlemen as a matter of self-interest. I think we should be very careful how we interfere in the way of intro- ducing any irritating element into this matter. Just pardon me for a moment while I 12.0. cast my thoughts back as briefly as possible to the manner in which we have treated the promoters of the movement which resulted in the consummation of the Australian Commonwealth at its first inception. They invited us to a Conference, and we sent over our delegates some years ago, and these dele- gates reported to us that there should be no further participation or sympathy on the part of New Zealand with that great movement. After many years, and after lengthened later and immense trouble, the representatives of the Australian States went before the House d Commons, and there our Agent-General me: them in a very discourteous manner indic. He attempted then to impose interference in s matter that solely belonged to Australia, al.d with which we had previously declared we had little or no concern or interest. And now, Sir. when they are arranging a tariff that they k- lieve to be for their own welfare, and also after we have had an important Commission travers ing the Australian Colonies at great cost to de- termine whether or not it would be wise for as to join in the Commonwealth movement in Aus. tralia-the moment, I say, when they have legen 
<page>1213</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1253</url>
to arrange a tariff for their own convenience we foolishly threaten them with a punitive tariff. I regret the time is so short that I cannot go into the matter fully, but, at any rate, I shall attempt to give members some idea of what I think will be the result of our interference. In the first place, if the Minister of Commerce, the Hon. Mr. Mills, had dealt with this matter aright he would have shown us precisely how the proposed tariff would affect our export in relation to the value of the other timber im- ported into Australia, and how far it was neces- sary for them to take our material. Mr. MILLS .- I would have done so only the time at my disposal was so limited. Mr. MONK .- We would be better off with a few solid figures or statistics of that kind than with what the honourable gentleman told us. Mr. FLATMAN .-. I thought you were in favour of this Bill. Mr. MONK .- No, I am not, because I do not see what the result will be to us. I should like to know whether it is necessary for the people of the Commonwealth to take our white-pine. I believe there are very few, if any, other kinds of timber so suitable for butter-boxes as our kahikatea. It is odourless and tasteless, and these are the two essential qualities in timber that is required for butter-boxes. But I am not satisfied that in the course of time they may not contrive other vessels for the purpose of carrying our butter, or discover means of effacing the odours and flavours of other timbers, and in that case we should suffer severely. Now,  with regard to kauri, in the cutting of the timber, if we send it away in flitches, there is no doubt we should have a large quantity of small sizes left on our hands, as by imposing a duty of 3s. on it I admit we should be under considerable difficulty in disposing of it in our own market. I have tested by some figures dealing with this matter from the point of view of the sawmillers in relation to white-pine only. Let us say a log of 1,000 ft. would cost when landed 10s. per 100 ft. in Melbourne; it would cost the miller when sawn up net 17s. per 100 ft., allowing the log to produce 800 ft. Now, in cutting up the timber on the other side they would be bur- dened with the small stuff, which I do not think would be worth 17s. And they would find a difficulty in getting rid of that, which would raise the price of white boards suitable for butter-boxes to about £1 a hundred. Now, I believe that if we do not impose this duty there will be a larger consumption of white- pine, and the trade will be in favour of this colony. There is a feature that I suppose has occupied the attention of the Cabinet while they have been dealing with this question, and that is to keep in the colony the labour that is engaged in our sawmills. The labour in pro- ducing the logs will supply a profit all the same. The milling of the log I have men- tioned is only a matter of about 12s. True, it would affect the timber merchants over on the other side, who are taking the logs from us and sawing them up there; and when we supply them with logs under the duty suggested they will have the burden of the small sizes, VOL. CXIX .- 78. and consequently will use less than they do at present. There are important interests in Aus- tralia which are very strong both ways, and if we let them alone I think it is likely we may come off better than by interfering at present. For instance, there is the Moreton Bay pine, and the mill-owners producing it would be very strongly in favour of this duty, and no doubt they have brought pressure on the Government to impose the proposed Commonwealth tariff as against our timber. On the other hand, there are very powerful traders in timber who have relations with us, and they are taking very large quantities of our stuff, and importing from Nor- way and Puget Sound and the limitless resources of Alaska. Of course, they will do all they possibly can to keep the duty down. Let us divest ourselves of the feeling that there is on the part of the Commonwealth an en- deavour to punish us. We are only to suffer the natural consequences of the duties they deem requisite for their own interests. Let us divest from our minds the feeling that this is all owing to partiality or preference. The Australian merchants are getting an import of far larger quantities of timber than we should ever send them, and they are met with pre- cisely the same duty, and it would be far better for us not to interfere at all in the matter. They know all we could tell them. They know how far we are punished or otherwise, and I would plead with the Government not to in- terfere in the matter ; and, if we find it is neces- sary or to our advantage to impose a duty next Parliament, let us do it with a perfect knowledge of all the conditions in which the question is involved. I plead with the House, having a feeling of sympathy or concern on behalf of New Zealand, to let us defer the con- sideration of this matter. Then, again, there was a remark made by the Minister as to re- tarding the destruction of our forests. The Minister may remember that I have fought in the House for the Government to take up this question, and to try and conserve our forests by protecting them from fire, but nothing was done ; and if I owned a forest my effort would be, not only in my own interests, but in the public interests, as quickly as possible to turn it into cash. Lately we have been favoured with moist summers, but only let us have a droughty season, and the destruction of forest may be enormous. I am sorry to have to say so, but such is the truth. I should like to see the Go- vernment take more care and means for the conservation of the remainder of our kauri forests than they are now doing. In regard to conserving the products of our bush lands, I think it is all nonsense. There is one matter I would like to call to the mind of the Hon. the Premier. Does he not remember that many years ago I complained about the Premier imposing a duty on standing timber, and making it to the interests of the bush- owners to get rid of the timber and turn it into cash as quickly as possible. Let them pay only a small royalty to take it out of their forests as soon as the bush has grown into a convenient size for marketable purposes. In 
<page>1214</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1254</url>
Canada and Norway every help is given to ! timber men. I hope the Minister will take my suggestion, and wait a few months before he determines how he will act, and I give him the assurance that it will make no difference to New Zealand. Let us not go into the matter definitely till we know how the Com- monwealth tariff is going to be finally arranged. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) .- 1 am opposed to this measure, as I consider it inimical to the best interests of the colony. See what Canada has done. It has approached the Common- wealth with the view of bringing about a friendly reciprocal tariff. What has our Go- vernment done? Nothing. The Minister for Railways stated just now that one reason for placing a duty of 3s. on balk timber was in order to give additional employment to our people. Sir J. G. WARD .-- I did not say that at all. Mr. MEREDITH .- Well, I understood you to say so ; but it cannot be otherwise. It will increase the cost of timber to the producer. If we propose doing this, why not place an export duty on wheat, so that the whole of the wheat grown in the colony could be converted into flour and exported ? I have eight sawmills in my electorate, and not one owner has ap- proached me on the question of an export duty on balk or any other kind of timber. Permit me to point out that, while we export to Aus- tralia timber to the value of about #233,659, we import from Australia timber to the value of nearly $100,000. We cannot do without Aus- tralian hard timber for our wharves, bridges, et cetera, so that in the imposition of an export tariff we are making a rod for our own backs.  Mr. HOUSTON (Bay of Islands). - It is not my intention to offer any opposition to the Bill, but there is one question I should like to lay before the Minister and the House in connec- tion with this export duty. I fear there is a danger of inflicting great injury on a large number of persons engaged in this industry. There are a number of men who buy small bushes who have been in the habit of cutting timber for export. The danger is that the larger millowners will obtain a monopoly, through these small people being obliged to sell their balk timber to them, and these large mills would only pay them a price less the export duty. This would throw the whole industry into the hands of the timber com- panies, to the injury of private individuals. I think it would be well if a clause were intro- duced preventing the large millowners from exercising this power of monopoly. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi). - It will be my duty to vote against this measure, for the reason that I think it a wrong start towards reciprocity. and our timber industry is so small compared with the produce trade that the advantage gained here will be infinitesimal, and not worth the effort. Perhaps it may be con- sidered by honourable members, because I do not come from a timber-export district, that I should allow other members to discuss this sub- ject ; but I wish to put on record some facts with regard to the price of timber in Australia to prove Mr. Monk that an export duty is not necessary for the success of our timber trade. I am quoting now from a circular issued by a timber merchant in Melbourne, dated the 9th September last- Mr. James Moore. He quotes kauri at per 100 ft. lineal, 5s. 9d. ; Oregon, narrow widths, 9s. 6d. per 100 ft. superficial. Now. Sir, there are even stronger reasons for a duty, as far as this colony is concerned, if we come to con- sider New Zealand white-pine for shelving and butter-boxes. For butter-boxes the cost in Melbourne is only 11s. 6d. per 100 ft. super- ficial, as against Alaska pine 17s. per loof. superficial. Honourable members will there. fore see that there is room for considerate export duty, and still make our timber salcalle in Australia at a substantial increase on what they are at present paying for it. Coming ?? kauri, the same reasons may apply. We have best kauri quoted at 1Ss. 6d. per 100 ft., up to 20s. 6d. for special quality. These are och reasons why the export duty should be put on and still allow competition with American timber. I see no strong reason against it from that point of view. And I consider the demand for our timbers in Australia will continue, notwithstanding the fact that an export duty here obtains. I will, however, read a portion of a letter which I have received from a tim- ber merchant, which gives a reason why an export duty should not be put on. He says,- " I think it would be a mistake to hurry on s protective duty on balk white-pine, as advised by the sawmillers in the North Island. They ought to leave this matter to next session, so as to let the matter settle, and it would then be better known what effect it would have co the timber trade. As far as I know at present. there is not much balk white-pine timber s.c .: to Australia, as it is not suitable in balk for butter. boxes, as balk cannot be seasoned ci & journey to Australia, as it would be liable w get discoloured, and therefore not likely to x used for that purpose. Again, they are so Far. ticular over the quality of it for butter boxes it suits them better to have it cut and scas Led in New Zealand ; and balk timber would be liable to have the resin veins and shakes through them ; and in the end, if they must have New Zealand white-pine, they will have the extra duty they put on to pay themselves." I think these reasons are very much te the point, and show that New Zealand will chi- mately be the loser in any reprisals they may make against the Commonwealth tariff. How- ever, as a retaliatory measure, in my opinter .. it is premature. We have no right to take of a position of assuming what is to take place. even though we have the proposal already made for the Australian tariff to differentiate azure New Zealand. I do not think that even tet- tively we should give the right that is sucesos in this measure to the Governor in Counch. I feel confident that Australia will want par balk timber, notwithstanding the duty : asil think it is not right, in the closing hours of the session, that, almost in a panic, we should pr- pose an export duty as retaliation. An expert 
<page>1215</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1255</url>
introduced before in this colony, and rarely in any other British dominion, and I look upon it with suspicion. I think it is unwise, more especially as it would be a strong reason for an effort by those interested to put an export duty on produce the value of which is not governed by any market price in the colony. This is not the way to provide for the cohesion of the Empire, and I am afraid that our tradi- tions with regard to the solidarity of the race will have a poor effect upon those who come after us, if we are to begin by a discriminating and retaliatory tariff. Good trade relations and reciprocal tariffs must bind the colonies closer together. An Hon. MEMBER .- What are they doing with us? Mr. BUDDO. - They have not so far done it, and it is not our duty to anticipate what they may do. I consider the bonds that will bind the Empire in future will be largely those of trade and its advantages ; and the taking up of this retaliatory attitude is not, I think, in the interests of this colony. I do not think it is in the interests of the federation of the whole British Empire, nor in the direction of having an Imperial zollverein. I will vote against this Bill if a division is called for, and I say that whatever is done ought to be reserved until next session. In the meanwhile we are losing nothing, and yet we are anticipating what may take place, and are giving the Governor in Council power to put on an export duty ; and it seems to me to be but the first part of a policy  of retaliation, in which the Commonwealth will have the sympathy of the Imperial authori- ties, and must win in a tariff war. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin). - Sir, like other #cc-zero speakers, I am sorry that we have not been able to deal with this Bill earlier in the session. A difficulty undoubtedly exists, on account of the provisional tariff which has lately been in- troduced by the Federal Government, which provides that, so far as sawn and dressed tim- ber is concerned, there will be certain duties imposed upon it, while it is proposed to admit duty free anything in the way of balk timber. Now, everybody knows that we have a large and valuable trade with Australia in timber, and the effect of what is proposed will un- doubtedly be to discourage the trade between this colony and Australia in sawn and dressed timber and to encourage the trade in balk timber. By this means a large amount of labour will be lost to the colony ; and it is to meet that difficulty that I understand the present Bill has been introduced. I do not believe in retaliation, and I must say I do not altogether like the principle of the Bill. I do not at all like the idea of this Parliament handing over its functions to the Governor in Council in the way proposed. But at the same time I want to admit that the amendment the Minister has promised will make the Bill much less objectionable than it is in its present form : and I would suggest that the Minister would go a little further, and that he should make this a temporary measure- l opening the door by which persons connected session of Parliament-that no duty should be collected under this Act after the last day of next session. That would leave the matter to be dealt with next session, and we could then fix the tarift when we know exactly what we are doing with regard to the Federal tariff, which at the present time we do not. I cannot, however, see my way at present to oppose the Bill, seeing that it is recommended by the Con- ference of sawmillers ; but I hope the Minister will adopt the suggestion I have made, and will introduce a clause in that direction. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City). - The most admirable feature in this brief discussion is the delicately expressed apprehension that the passing of this Bill may take the people of Australia by surprise. That is very amusing. It was cabled to Australia from New Zealand a month ago that Mr. Seddon -- not the Parlia- ment of New Zealand-that Mr. Seddon in- tended to put on a duty of 3s. per 100 ft. Mr. SEDDON. - It was said that he had done SO. Mr. FISHER .-- The idea of reprisals being effected by New Zealand is a matter of laughter and mirth in Australia. But the honourable gentleman wants this Bill passed so that he may be able to shake it in the face of the people of Australia, and make them laugh a little more. Mr. John Norton, of Sydney, in Truth, speaks of the comedy of little New Zealand, who is in the van in progressive legislation, indulging in reprisals to be effected by this colony, and he asks the people of Australia what does it matter to them "what may be done by the people living in that little mud- patch down in the South Pacific?" Now, the very fact of the passing of this Bill is an impotent threat to the people of Australia. The idea that the eyes of all the people of Australia are directed toward what we may do in this matter is absurd. The fact is, the people of Australia are not thinking of New Zealand at all in the matter, and the state- ment as to there being reprisals on the part of New Zealand is, as I have said, a matter of If it will laughter throughout Australia. please the honourable gentleman to have this new toy, by all means let him have it. As far as the people of Australia are concerned, they do not care a snap of the finger what we do. We are to Australia what the Cook Islands are to New Zealand. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton). - Honour- able members, of course, recognise that this is a very important departure from what has hitherto been the policy in New Zealand in connection with exports. For the first time we are asked to affirm the principle of an ex- port duty. Now, in the case of these exports, it appears that it is not from Australia but from the New Zealand sawmillers that pressure comes. We must recognise that, if persons connected with a particular industry are going to be in a position to bring pressure to bear upon the Government to alter the fiscal policy of the colony in a matter like this, you are 
<page>1216</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1256</url>
future years. If the time comes when further taxation is required, taking the precedent of this export duty, we may have an export duty on wool, on frozen meat, or on some other article of a similar description. That is one point which I wish to draw attention to. Another point is that the value of the timber exported from the colony in logs is comparatively small. I have before me the export tables for the year 1900, and I find that the total value of hewn timber logs exported was £8,290. On the other hand, the value of the sawn undressed timber exported to Australia amounted to about $190,000. Now, I gather this measure will not affect the sawn undressed timber at all-only if it be exported in the shape of flitches. I do not know what size may be laid down in connection with flitches in order to bring them within the four corners of the duty ; but it appears to me, looking at it from the point of view I have stated, that about $190.000 of the #240,000 exported of sawn un- dressed timber will not come within the pro- visions of the Act. I do not see what is going to be gained by putting a duty on the eight or nine thousand pounds' worth of logs that this Bill is apparently intended to meet. There is another point, and that is this: We hear that the labourers engaged in connection with the saw- mills are likely to be thrown out of work. Well, I do not think such a result as that is likely to follow from the Australian tariff. Mr. MEREDITH .- It does not affect the South Island. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- It may not affect the South Island, but I am not speaking from the point of view of any particular part of the colony. But I wish members to understand that this timber duty certainly will not affect the Australian tariff, and, therefore, if we are going to put an export duty on timber for the purpose of conserving the interests of one par- ticular industry, we need not be surprised if an agitation springs up for the imposition of an export duty also on other articles in which a large number of persons are interested. Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) .- I am sorry to say I cannot support this Bill, and I hope the Minister, after hearing the discussion on it, will hold it over until next session. I have received a communication from a sawmiller up north protesting in the strongest language against the passing of this Bill, and had it not been that I have packed up my letters and papers and sent them away, I would take the opportunity of reading it to the House. How- ever, this sawmiller points out that if a duty is put on it will create a huge monopoly for the benefit of the large timber sawmillers of Auckland, and that the small owners of bushes and dealers in timber will be the sufferers. He points out that the real object of this agitation is to create a huge trust or monopoly in the province of Auckland; and I hope the Minis- ter will see the wisdom of considering this matter, and of withdrawing the Bill in the meantime till next session. If, after the Australian tariff is passed, we find it to be Mr. G. W. Russell be dealt with next session, but I think we should be doing a foolish thing if we were to hurriedly push this Bill through. In fact, Sir, we scarcely know what we are doing, and we may be, instead of assisting the timber in- dustry, injuring it very materially for all we  know. Certainly, from the letter of this saw. miller, he makes out a very strong case in my opinion, and the effect of it will be, as he says. to injure the settlers who are the owners of timber, and injure the small dealers or traders in timber, and, in fact, it will create a huge monopoly for the benefit of two or three large companies. Under these circumstances, I hope the Minister will hold the Bill over until We should be careful not to next session. anticipate the Federal tariff. Mr. MILLS (Commissioner of Trade and Customs) .- Sir, I shall make it very clear that this Bill was not brought down in any spirit of retaliation whatever. I wish to state that em- phatically, because I have on my file a Bili that was drafted nearly three months ago, when Cabinet considered it advisable, in the interest of the better working and conservation of our timber, to have an export duty placed on roug. timber. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Will you place a copy of that Bill on the table ? Mr. MILLS. - No; that could do no good. but I will show it to the honourable gentleman if he wishes. As I say, I wish that point re conservation made very clear to the House and to the country. Then, honourable gentlemen will recollect that a tariff was passed by the Federal Parliament, and why ? To denude our forests, and cut the timber in Australia. True, it is only a tentative measure, but it is the law at present ; and I would point out to honcur- able members that, if you once change the avenues of trade, the results must be very serious. The honourable member for Mar den has just said, Let this Bill stand over for s year, in the interests of a few small settiers: and to that I reply, that in the meantime you will paralyse the industry, and all the raw timber in these logs would be taken from us, and the industry of working them up would be established in another country, while our own sawmillers would be deprived of that trade. If you once allow a change to take place, such as the honourable gentleman re- ferred to, you could never bring that trade back. Therefore I should like placed on record in Hansard what the Australian tariff really means to us. Now this tariff as passed by the Commonwealth is as follows :- Duties. "Architraves, mouldings, and skirtings of s. d. 5 0 any material, per 100 lineal feet .. " Timber, dressed, n.e.i., per 100 super- 3 0 ficial feet "Timber, undressed, n.e.i., in sizes of 12 in. by 6 in. (or its equivalent) and = over, per 100 superficial feet "Timber, undressed, n.e.i., in sizes of 7 in. by 24 in. (or its equivalent), and upwards, and less than 12 in. 
<page>1217</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1257</url>
by 6 in. (or its equivalent), per 100 superficial feet . 6 1 "Timber, undressed, n.e.i., of sizes less than 7in. by 2} in. (or its equiva- lent), per 100 superficial fect 2 6 " Laths, per 1,000 0 5 " Palings, per 1,000 . 0 15 . . " Pickets, dressed, per 100 0 4 . . " Pickets, undressed, per 100 0 2 .. " Shingles, per 1,000 .. 0 3 " Doors, of wood, 12 in. and over, each .. 6 7 over 1} in. and under 13 in., each 0 5 1} in. and under, each 3 6 I think honourable members will admit at once that these figures are really prohibitive, and we are not considering an altogether new thing. The tariff has been passed, and is the law at the present time in the Commonwealth of Australia. In order to show what the inten- tion and meaning of the Federal Parliament was, I turn over to the exemptions from the tariff, and find the following :- " Logs, not sawn. "New Zealand pine, undressed, of sizes 12 in. by 6 in. (or its equivalent) or over. "Shafts and poles, sawn or bent, but not dressed. " Spars, in the rough. "Spokes, rims, and felloes of hickory, in the rough. " Staves, undressed or roughly dressed, but not shaped. " Veneers." Showing conclusively their policy is to en- courage all the work being done in Australia. Well, now, if there is nothing done by this   Parliament to counteract the exodus of our raw material, and we allow the logs to be exported, those who are competent to give a safe opinion, and who are engaged in the business, say the effect would be to kill the saw-milling industry in this colony. The Conference of sawmillers which was held here quite recently comprised representatives from all parts of the colony, and they were unanimous in their resolutions. They passed at their meeting the following resolution : - "That this meeting, very largely represent- ing the timber industry in New Zealand, would urge upon the Government the necessity, in the interests of the workers of this country, to place an export duty on all logs, either in the round or squared with axe or saw, of such an amount as will prevent the export of such timber from our shores." And, later on, it was moved that the duty be 3s. per hundred superficial feet. Now, while there may be a few settlers up North who might have to sell their timber to companies, as explained by the honourable member for Mars- den, that does not affect the matter on the whole. Mr. R. THOMPSON .- It will kill the small men. Mr. MILLS .- Not at all. There are always those who, when alterations of the tariff are possibly suffer by the change ; but you have to deal with the collective interests of all the saw- millers combined, and I tell the House that since that Conference sat here I have been in constant communication with other sawmillers who were unable to attend, and they were of the same opinion as those who were here and approve of the course that this Bill proposes to take. We wanted to know the mind of all who were interested in this industry, and instead of the South Island not being interested in the business, as was stated by the honourable member for Ashley (Mr. Meredith), why, Sir,. he forgets altogether the vast timber interests . that are growing up on the West Coast of the South Island, and in Southland too. There was exported from the West Coast some- thing like 19,000,000ft. of timber last year, and new sawmills are going up, so that it is. likely there will be between 30,000,000 ft. and. 40,000,000 ft. exported next year. Then, there is the White-pine Company down South. All these timber people were in agreement, and a resolution was passed, " That the duty on round or square logs be 3s. per 100 ft." I ask mem- bers to say, were the representatives of these large industries competent to give an opinion ? If so-and I believe they were-we are not far astray. They were the proper persons to con- sult. One northern millowner told me he paid £30,000 a year in wages. He said, " If the Government do not pass a Bill providing for this export duty it means that I am to shut up some of my sawmills, and remove them to the other side, either Sydney or Melbourne. I do not think honourable members will con- sider this style of encouraging industries in our colony would be either wise or judicious. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Then, it is retaliatory, is it ? Mr. MILLS .- No, certainly not ; but if you saw some one take a thousand sheep from your paddock without authority, or consulting you in the matter, you would be the first to stop them, and so would any one. Therefore, in the interests of the whole colony, we should do the best we can to encourage these industries and have the timber sawn up into suitable sizes in our own colony before exporting. And when we consider the immense amount of bush that has been wasted, cut, and destroyed in this colony, we must realise that more interest ought to be taken in the matter. I understand from the Public Works Department that the average life of a bridge is only about sixteen years, and the average life of all the wooden buildings in New Zealand is not more than thirty to thirty-five years; and when we con- sider the growing population of the colony, it means the local consumption of timber must steadily increase year by year, and more in- terest must be taken in this important ques- tion. Therefore I think the measure is a wise one, and I trust it will receive the favourable consideration of the House. The House divided on the question, "That the Bill be read a second time." 
<page>1218</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1258</url>
AYES, 35. Hornsby Parata llen, J. Rhodes Houston Arnold Lang Seddon Bennet Smith, G. J. Carroll Lawry Lethbridge Steward Duncan Field Symes Massey Tanner MeGowan Flatman Fraser, A. L. D. Mckenzie, R. Ward Willis. Hall McNab Hall-Jones Tellers. Millar Mills Carncross Heke Gilfedder. Palmer Hogg NOES, 17. Russell, W. R. Graham Atkinson Buddo Thompson, R. Hutcheson Thomson, J. W. Laurenson Collins Mackenzie, T. Tellers. Ell Herries Meredith Fowlds Russell, G. W. Monk. Fraser, W. Majority for, 18. Motion agreed to, and Bill read a second time. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 2 .- " The Governor may at any time by Order in Council cause to be levied, col- lected," and paid at the Customs to His Majesty, previous to exportation from New Zealand, the duties upon timber as set forth in the Schedule hereto." Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) moved to strike out the words, "The Governor may at any time by Order in Council cause to," with the view of inserting the words, " There shall." The Committee divided on the question, "That the words proposed to be omitted stand part of the clause." AYES, 31. #cc-zero Gilfedder Allen, E. G. O'Meara Palmer Arnold Hall-Jones Bennet Hogg Parata Buddo Houston Symes Lawry Carncross Tanner Carroll Thomson, J. W. Massey Colvin Ward. McGowan Mackenzie, T. Duncan Field McNab Tellers. Flatman Meredith Barclay Fraser, A. L. D. Mills Hornsby. NOES. 19. Atkinson Russell, W. R. Hutcheson Collins Lang Smith, G. J. Lethbridge ElI Thompson, R. Fisher Millar Fowlds Monk Tellers. Graham Rhodes Allen, J. Russell, G. W. Herries. Guinness Majority for, 12. Amendment negatived, and clause agreed to. Clause 3 .- "(1.) The master or agent of every ship in which it is intended to ship for export timber liable to duty shall give notice to the Collector or other proper officer of Cus- toms of such intention, in such form as the Commissioner may direct by regulation, and such notice shall be given not less than twenty- four hours prior to shipment. "(2.) If any such timber is shipped without such notice being given, the master shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds." Mr. MILLS (Commissioner of Customs) moved to strike out the word "shall " after "master," in subsection (2), and insert "and agent shall each." Amendment agreed to. Mr. MILLS moved to strike out the words " exceeding fifty " with a view of inserting the words " less than ten." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Clause 4 .- " Export entries for dutiable timher shipped, containing correct particulars of the number of superficial feet and the amount of duty payable thereon, shall be passed at the Customhouse before the clearance of the ship, and the Collector or other proper officer of Customs shall have power to detain the ship until he is satisfied that the full amount of duty has been paid on such timber." Mr. MILLS moved to insert after the word "Customhouse," the words " and the duty paid." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Clause 5 .- "The Commissioner of Customs may, by regulations, specify and determine in what manner dutiable timber shall be shipped in order that a true account of the number of superficial feet contained therein shall be ob- tained by a Customs officer ; and any master of an exporting ship, or other person concerned, who fails to comply with such regulations shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten pounds." Mr. MILLS moved the excision of the words " exceeding ten " with the view of substituting the words "less than five." Amendment agreed, to and clause as amended agreed to. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) moved the addition of the following new clause : - "This Act shall remain in force until ten days after the last day of the next session of Parliament and no longer." The Committee divided. AYES, 24. Russell, G. W. Allen, J. Guinness Russell, W. R. Hutcheson Atkinson Barclay Lang Symes Collins Tanner Laurenson Thompson. R. Ell Lawry Field Teilers. Massey Fisher Buddo Meredith Fowlds Rhodes Herries. Graham NOES, 24. Allen, E. G. Heke Parata Carncross Hogg Seddon Carroll Hornsby Ward Colvin Willis McGuire Mckenzie, R. Witheford. Duncan Millar Flatman Tellers. Gilfedder Mills Arnold Palmer. Hall O'Meara Hall-Jones 
<page>1219</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1259</url>
vote with the "Noes," as this was a policy measure, and he did not think it was the duty of the Chairman to affirm an alteration in the Bill by his casting-vote. New clause negatived. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) moved the addition of the following new clause :- "The exporter of any timber declared duti- able under this Act, or his agent, shall, im- mediately upon the entry thereof by him, pay any duties which may be payable thereon to the Collector or other proper officer authorised to receive the same." New clause negatived. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) moved the addition of the following new clause :- "This Act shall be deemed to be repealed on the expiration of three months after the com- mencement of the next session of Parliament." The Committee divided on the question, " That the new clause be read a second time." AYES, 21. Rhodes Allen, J. Guinness Russell, G. W. Herries Atkinson Russell, W. R. Hutcheson Collins Thompson, R. Ell Lang Fisher Lethbridge Tellers. Buddo Meredith Fowlds Fraser, W. Monk Massey. Graham NOES, 28. Palmer Allen, E. G. Heke Arnold Hogg Symes Hornsby Tanner Carncross Kaihau Ward Carroll Laurenson Colvin Willis Witheford. Lawry Duncan Fraser, A. L. D. McGowan Millar Gilfedder Tellers. Mills Flatman Hall Mckenzie, R. Hall-Jones O'Meara Majority against, 7. Motion for second reading negatived. Schedule. Or such higher superficial feet superficial feet \- 3s. per 100 duty, not exceed- Logs, round ing 5s. per 100 Logs, squared with superficial feet, as 1 axe or saw the Governor by Half-logs Order in Council . . determines. Flitches of any par- ticular kind, or 3s. per 100 Or such lesser duty pieces, of such size as the Go- as the Governor by Order in Coun- vernor by Order cil determines. in Council from \- time to time de- termines Mr. MILLS (Commissioner of Customs) moved to strike out the words " Or such higher duty, not exceeding 5s. per 100 superficial feet, as the Governor by Order in Council deter- mines," and to insert " Or such lesser duty as the Governor by Order in Council determines." Motion agreed to. Bill reported, and read a third time. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Labour) brought up the following report of the Conference on this Bill :- "The Managers appointed by the House of Representatives to conduct the Conference upon the Factories Bill have the honour to report that they have met the Managers appointed by the Legislative Council, and they have come to the following agreement, namely :- " In new clause 194, line 3, after ' women' to insert ' over the age of eighteen years.' "In clause 20, subclause (3), to restore the first proviso. " In clause 2, to amend the last paragraph so as to read as follows : 'Boy ' means every male under the age of sixteen years. "The other amendments made by the Coun- cil are accepted." On the question, That the report be agreed to, Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) said, So far as he could learn, if the House adopted the recom- mendation of their Managers, the principal point had been more or less conceded by the Managers for the House. The principal point at issue between the House and another place was the question of the employment of women and youths for more than forty-five hours per week in woollen-factories. That had been the law previous to 1894 in all factories, when exemption was made of woollen-mills. Since then woollen-mills could employ women and young persons for forty-eight hours. This re. solution would affect a case filed and decision given by the Conciliation Court in Canterbury District, and now appeal had been made to the Arbitration Court. In this appeal the question 1 of hours of labour per week came up, and this Bill would to some extent prejudice any ap- plication to the Arbitration Court for a re- duction of hours of labour. He would be sorry to believe that this Factories Bill could detrimentally affect the woollen in- dustry, which was in a flourishing condition. He was opposed to differentiating between an employé in a clothing factory and those in a woollen-mill, and he believed that the woollen factory worker deserved equal consideration in the Factories Act. He admitted that the Arbi- tration Court could supersede this legislation if sufficient cause was shown. He was not pre- pared to vote against the Bill, as it contained some excellent provisions ; but he could not help thinking that this Bill left all questions of a principle in labour legislation aside, when it proposed to discriminate in the hours of labour of employés engaged in different industries of similar class of employment. Motion agreed to. Subsequently, A message was received from the Legisla- tive Council intimating that the report of the Conference on this Bill had been agreed to. NELSON HARBOUR BOARD BILL. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 1 .- Short Title. Amendment by Mr. GRAHAM (Nelson), to 
<page>1220</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1260</url>
Clause 4 .- "The Board shall not enter into any contract for the construction of a channel through the Boulder Bank until the tenders for the work have been submitted to and approved by the Minister of Marine." Sir J. G. WARD (Minister for Railways) moved to strike out the word "tenders" and insert "specifications." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Clause 6 .- " (1.) The Motueka Wharf shall not, after the passing of this Act, be deemed to be vested in the Nelson Harbour Board, but shall be under the control of a Board to be called ' The Motueka Wharf Board,' consisting of the members of the Waimea County for the time being representing the Motueka and Moutere Ridings, and the Mayor of Motueka. "(2.) The Motueka Wharf Board shall have such powers with respect to the Motueka Wharf and its approaches by water as are from time to time conferred upon it by regulations. "(3.) The Governor, after making such in- quiry as he thinks fit, may determine what con- stitutes the assets and liabilities of the said wharf, and may also do or direct to be done whatever is necessary in order that the wharf, its assets and liabilities, may be effectually transferred to the Motueka Wharf Board. "(4.) This section is in substitution for sec- tion six of the principal Act, which section is hereby accordingly repealed." Mr. HALL-JONES (Minister of Marine) moved to add the following words to subsection  (2) : "which may from time to time be made by the Governor in Council. Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Clause 7 .- " All foreshore and mud - flats within the Motueka Electoral District, be- tween the boundary of the Nelson City Elec- toral District and the entrance of the Motueka River, are hereby declared to be endowments for the Motueka Wharf, and shall be adminis- tered accordingly by the Motueka Wharf Board." Mr. HALL - JONES (Minister of Marine) moved to strike out the words " boundary of the Nelson City Electoral District," and to insert the following words : "the southern boundary-line of Section number ninety - one, Block I., Moutere Survey District." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Bill reported, and read a third time. VICTORIA COLLEGE SITE BILL. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 1 .- Short Title. Mr. Seddon's amendment, to insert be- tween "The Victoria College Site " and " Act, 1901," the following words : "and Wellington College and Girls' High School and Wellington Hospital Empowering," under consideration. Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Clause 2 .- " (1.) The Wellington City Council Mr. Graham in the First Schedule hereto, in exchange for such part (not exceeding ten acres) of the Wel- lington College Site Reserve as is agreed on between the Wellington City Council and the Governors of the Wellington College and Girls' High School, but so that the eastern boundary of such part is coincident in whole or in part with the eastern boundary of the said reserve. "(2.) The said Governors are hereby em- powered to convey or transfer such last-men- tioned land to the Wellington City Council." Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) moved to add the following words after "for such part ": "of the Wellington College Site Re- serve as may be agreed upon between the Wellington City Council and the Governors of the Wellington College and Girls' High School, or for such other land as the Wellington City Council may consider to be of equal value as a public reserve with the land described in the First Schedule hereto." Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved to insert the words "not being Crown lands " after the words " such other land." Mr. SEDDON moved to report progress. Motion agreed to. Progress reported. DEATH OF THE HON. J. A. BONAR, M.L.C. Mr. SEDDON (Premier). - Sir, I 5.0. rise to propose, That the House do ad- journ until half-past seven o'clock this evening, as a mark of respect to the memory of the late Hon. James A. Bonar, M.L.C., who was this day called away to his long home. Death. S.r. I think, has been with us more this session than in any other session in the history of our Parliament. To me the loss of an old friend of thirty-five years' standing, and one who I may say had a great deal to do with introducing me to public life, is a severe blow. The Hon. Mr. Bonar has been connected with Westland and the West Coast as County Chairman, Superin- tendent, Chairman Harbour Board, Chairman School Commissioners, and colonel of Velun- teers, and with almost every movement and work for the development and benefit from its earliest settlement his name has been asso- ciated ; and he has taken a leading part as the representative of that part of the colony in the Legislative Council for over thirty years. I say that representation has been to the benefit of the district and in the best interests of the colony. He can ill be spared. This session Westland has lost both its representatives in the Legislative Council-first the Hon. James Kerr, and now the Hon. James A. Bonar- and this double loss will be keenly felt by the people on the West Coast. There are many here who have known him in years past who will bear testimony to his genial kind-hearted- ness and readiness to help on all occasions. I feel assured one and all will tender their heart- felt sympathy and condolence to his wife and family in their sad bereavement. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay) .- Sir, I 
<page>1221</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1261</url>
years-more almost than I can recall-one of the figures which presents itself to my mind as a member of the Legislature is that of the gentleman whose death we mourn to-day. Sir, I can remember him as a kindly gentleman, a man whom I have met frequently in social life in years gone by, a man long connected with this Legislature, but who probably will be more remembered for the good work he did in the early days when Westland was first separated from the Provincial District of Canterbury. In those days the late Hon. Mr. Bonar was one We of the leading men on the West Coast. ought to see by his untimely death how closely death surrounds us, and how charitable we ought to be in our estimation of one another. Motion agreed to. NATIVE LAND CLAIMS ADJUSTMENT AND LAWS AMENDMENT BILL. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) 7.30. moved the committal of this Bill. He would give any explanations required in Com- mittee. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay) did not intend to occupy much time in addressing himself to the measure. He would like to re- mind honourable members that, when the question came up that morning on the Re- serves and Other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, he told the House he thought Bills of the kind ought to be agreed to solely on the responsi- bility of Ministers. It was practically im possible for members to understand or really  to get to probe all the intricate questions submitted to them, and Ministers, aided by their departmental officers, in bringing in a Bill of the sort, ought to be personally re- sponsible that all the clauses were right and proper-that there was nothing dishonest or immoral in them, and that on Ministers them- selves the responsibility ought to rest. He was not referring to this Ministry or any other Ministry, but laying down what he conceived was the only true principle upon which Bills of the sort could be properly passed. It was impossible for Committees to get reliable information on all the questions, and in the Native Affairs Committee this year they had done their very best in going through the Bill to arrive at what was right and what was wrong ; but, although they had done so, he con- tended it was practically impossible for the Committee to understand the merits of the fifty odd clauses they had to decide upon. What he wished to do was to draw attention to the character of the alterations and amendments set out in the Bill. Clause 3 allowed an appeal to be heard which was not lodged at the time it ought to have been lodged. That was a proposal to set aside the provisions of the Native Land Court Act of 1894, which set out in clause 84 the methods under which appeals were to be permitted. Those appeals were to be lodged within thirty days, and the Chief Judge had power to extend the time; and, although the Chief Judge could extend the sion of time shall exceed three months from the date of such extension." Clauses 5 and 6 and others reopen cases that had al- ready been decided by the Native Land Court, and authorised cancellation of existing orders. Honourable members would see that great power was given. Clause 7 legalised an illegal purchase as regarded the area alienated-that was to say, that under the provisions of " The Native Land Court Act, 1894," it was pro- vided that only a certain area of Native land should be sold to any individual ; yet, notwith- standing that, in some instances those who knew they had no right to exceed a certain area had purchased Native land in excess of the prescribed area, and those transactions were now to be validated. There was nothing im- moral in the transactions, but they were ille- gal. Clause 9 proposed to give power to reopen a will case which had been heard before the Native Land Court, from which there was appeal to the Appellate Court, and now under this Bill they were to have another tribunal which was to review the de- cision of the Appellate Court. Under clause 11 the decision of the Appellate Court was made a decision of the lower Court, to en- able further appeals to be made. Under clauses 12, 17, and others it was declared that the final decisions of the Appellate Court were to be void. Clause 93 of "The Native Land Court Act, 1894, " reads : " The decision of the Appellate Court shall, as to every question of law and fact, be final and conclusive "; and yet, notwithstanding this provision of " The Native Land Court Act, 1894," they were now going behind the decision of the Appellate Court to set up other tribunals to review the decision of the Appellate Court. Sections 19 and 20 were for the purpose of validating validations. A special Court had been set up to inquire into and settle the whole question of disputed titles in the neighbourhood of Poverty Bay, and the decision of that Court was to be final. They were now asked to give power to validate in- formal decisions of the Validation Court. Sec- tion 32 was an appeal from the Appellate Court to the ownership of land adjudicated upon some years ago, and which land was now being administered by the Public Trustee. Under this Bill seven different Native Land Acts were amended, and the ordinary layman could not possibly know what the state of the law was. The Bill amended the following Acts : "The Native Contracts and Promises Act, 1888," "The Special Powers and Con- tracts Act, 1886," "The Reserves, Endow- ments, and Crown and Native Lands Exchange, Sale, Disposal, and Enabling Act, 1898," "The Native Land Court Act, 1894," "The Native Land Laws Amendment Act, 1895," " The Na- 'tive Townships Act, 1895," and "The Native Land Laws Amendment Act, 1896." The Bill also extended " The Native Land Laws Amend- ment Act, 1898," and revived part of "The Na- tive Land Act Amendment Act, 1878." He did not want to say he had any reason to believe that any serious injustice was being done, or, indeed, 
<page>1222</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1262</url>
What he wanted to draw the attention of the House to was this fact : that, although the members of the Native Affairs Committee had done the very best they could in the short time at their disposal to go through the various clauses, it was impossible for them to ascertain the true merits in any one single case. The evidence tendered was all ex parte, and he for one would take no responsibility upon his shoulders for anything that might be wrong in this Bill. He did not wish to say the Govern- ment were behaving wrongly in bringing down this Bill, but he went back to the position with which he started-that there was no clause of the Bill on which members could arrive at a definite or decided opinion, for the facts were such that it was impossible for any one but the departmental officers to give an opinion upon them. There was no doubt, however, about this : that by such a Bill we were undermining the authority of our own Native Land Courts and Native Appellate Court. Their decisions, which were supposed to be final and con- clusive, were liable now to be reviewed, and he knew it for a fact that the Judges of the Native Land Court felt already that the feeling amongst the Natives that by petitioning they could upset final decisions of the Native Land Courts was upsetting their respect for the de- cisions of the Appellate Court, and that the Natives themselves were losing confidence in those Courts. Under these circumstances, he invited the House to be very careful how it dealt with this Bill, and to lay the responsi- bility on the Native Minister and the Govern-  ment, and not throw that responsibility on the Native Affairs Committee, which had not been able to ascertain what the actual position really was. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said, as far as the Government were concerned, they were bring- ing forward this Bill because they had been re- quested to do so, because members had ap- proached them on the subject, and because the parties more particularly interested had peti- tioned Parliament. The honourable member for Hawke's Bay must take some responsibility, because he had been sitting on the Committee which had been inquiring into many matters covered by this Bill, and upon which the Com- mittee had reported favourably, and the Go- vernment, therefore, were now giving effect to the recommendations made. It would be simply an impossibility for the Government to know the full details of every case ; but, as far as they had been able to ascertain the bearing of the results of the proposed legislation, they felt it would remove many cases of injustice. They believed persons had suffered from various causes, and where this was done it was in Par- liament, which was the highest Court of the land, in which relief should be given. It was the Court by and under which relief was ex- pected to be given; and, that being the case, this was the only way to do it. These cases had been known for years, and members of the Native race, and also Europeans who were interested, had looked forward with hope, and Captain Russell their circumstances, and they had done so under this Bill ; and, if good cause was shown why any clause should be struck out or altered, the Government would only be too pleased to allow the matter to stand over for further con- sideration. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) was not pre- pared, like the honourable member for Hawke's Bay, to pass the Bill on the understanding that the whole of the responsibility was to be shunted on to the shoulders of the Minister. It was not right for the House to take up that attitude, and it was not fair for the Com- mittee themselves. With regard to the Bill mentioned by the honourable member for Hawke's Bay, the Reserves and Other Lauds Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, he might say there were fifty-two clauses in that Bill. Now, he came across one very dangerous provision there, re- lating to a tramway concession in the neigh- bourhood of Christchurch. On hearing of the facts of the matter he went to the Government, and when he represented the circumstances to them they agreed to strike that clause out. An Hon. MEMBER said the Bill now before the House was a Maori Bill. Mr. ELL was quite aware of this, and had merely given an illustration to show that if they shunted all responsibility on to the shoulders of the Ministry, as the honourable member for Hawke's Bay suggested, they would not be doing their duty ; and to put the respon- sibility on the Minister was not fair to him. Members should take their share of the re- sponsibility. They were supposed to be more acquainted with the needs of their several localities, and to be more conversant with the particulars of matters brought up in connection with their districts than any Minister could possibly be. His feeling with regard to this Bill was that they should not proceed with it. There were fifty-six clauses in the Bill, and they were within a few hours of the closing of the session, and he did not see how they were to deal with an important Bill amending dif- ferent Acts relating to land-administration. Mr. HEKE (Northern Maori) said, in respect to the main number of clauses there was really nothing serious, and nothing for the members of the House to take exception to. They were pretty well all based on favourable reports made by the Native Affairs Committee. On the other hand, the only objection was as recaris those clauses affecting the individual blocks, the question being as to whether it was a right policy to allow the Native Land Court, or the Native Appellate Court, or a Royal Commissior. to review these cases over again. In Maori cases he held that the circumstances were so entirely different from anything else that they were entitled to a further review by the Court. Strong reasons had been adduced before the Native Affairs Committees which caused them to make reports urging the Government that some legislation should be passed for the purpose of giving effect to the prayers of the petitioners. In reference to the clauses ameud- 
<page>1223</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1263</url>
expressly explained to the Committee by the Chief Judge of the Native Land Court that these amendments were entirely necessary. The amendments in regard to the amendment of the Validation of Titles Act were also entirely necessary, and the Judge of the Validation Court, Judge Batham, explained to the Com- mittee the necessity of those clauses being passed. The validation clauses in the Bill only dealt with questions where doubt had arisen in the minds of the Validation Court as to whether they had any jurisdiction to confirm the decrees made by that Court. There was really nothing very serious in the whole of the clauses. Mr. HOUSTON (Bay of Islands) said this Bill was the result of a considerable amount of deliberation on the part of the Native Affairs Committee in years gone by. There were some clauses which embodied recommendations made to the Government on petitions presented to the House, and he thought it was only a small mede of justice to the Natives who had so per- sistently brought their grievances to the House in years gone by. On investigation by the Com- mittee it was found absolutely necessary to give some redress to those Natives, and that could only be done by legislation. The various mem- bers of the Committee, and himself personally, from his position as Chairman of the Committee, had represented to the Government for the last four or five years that something should be done. It was not a fair thing for the Natives that they should be kept waiting year after year.  This Bill contained many clauses rectifying errors which had been committed in the past. The Bill had received the careful attention of the Native Affairs Committee. That Com-   mittee had the benefit of the evidence and advice of the Chief Judge of the Native Land Court, the Judge of the Validation Court, and the chief officer of the Native Department, who explained the Bill clause by clause. The Com- mittee saw that some clauses required amend- ment. The necessary amendments were made, and, after careful consideration, the Bill was reported to the House. He thought it would be only justice if this Bill were allowed to go through. The various clauses could be ex- plained in detail in Committee. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said it was true what the honourable member for Hawke's Bay stated, that the various clauses embodied in this Bill dealt with a variety of cases which had arisen many years ago -- cases affecting judgments given by the Native Land Court, the Native Appellate Court, and also in con- sequence of reports from the Native Affairs Committee on petitions from the Maoris. It .was true that they were asked by these clauses to validate certain imperfect transactions which were left over as a result of investigations in the past by different tribunals. It was true, also, that they were giving effect to the recommendations of the Native Affairs Com- mittee upon certain petitions. It was true, also, that the measure touched upon incom- plete performances under the Special Powers Careful inquiry into each case, however, had been made by the Native Affairs Committee and by Government officers, and everything now in the Bill was justifiable. The ex- planation of clause 2A was that it was the subject of a petition by the Natives in the North, who, it was stated, lost some of their land as a result of the operations of the old law, which took away their land that was in excess of what they had sold to the Europeans. Those claims were now known as the " old surplus land claims." Formerly the settlers bought land off the Natives, but did not have it surveyed. The selling Natives, who were not always the rightful owners, indicated the boundaries by certain hills and streams, and said, "We will sell that to you, pakeha." A rough deed was drawn up, and the estimated area stated, leaving the survey to make the area definite afterwards. Many Europeans settled upon Native land in that way. The law in force at the time provided that no European could hold more than a certain area of Native land, and if the land purchased from the Natives was in excess of that limit, then anything in ex- cess went to the Crown, and did not go back to the Natives. This led to many injustices being done to the Natives. The true owners some- times found themselves minus their land, which was given away by a neighbouring tribe to a European ; and whatever was in excess of the limit required by law, instead of being returned to them, went into the hands of the Crown. Clause 2 dealt with one of those cases which the Government thought should be set right. Clause 3 affected a piece of land that was in- vestigated by the Native Affairs Committee, about which it was asked to restore a right of appeal. The Committee reported as follows :- "I am directed to report that, in the opinion of this Committee, petitioners have a just claim for consideration ; and it is recommended that the Government should bring in the necessary legislation to give the relief prayed for." Now, this was against a decision of the Native Land Court. The ground set up was this : that they were not present when the Court investi- gated the matter and gave judgment thereupon. They showed good reason why they were not present. The Committee had reviewed the evi- dence of the petitioners, and had come to the conclusion that in all justice a rehearing should be ordered. He might say generally that all these cases were the subject of reports and re- commendations from the Native Affairs Com- mittee, and the Government departments had made careful inquiry as to their merits, and, being satisfied, had drawn these clauses to enable the Legislature to give effect to what was re- quired. He would not say any more just now, but would give explanations in Committee upon every clause if questioned by any honourable member. Bill read a second time. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 9 .- Extended time for notice of appeal by Natives in succession to Wahanui Huatere. 
<page>1224</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1264</url>
"That the amendments proposed by the Native Affairs Committee be agreed to." AYES, 34. Flatman Millar Allen, E. G. Arnold Gilfedder Palmer Graham Barclay Parata Buddo Russell, G. W. Guinness Carncross Seddon Hall Carroll Hall-Jones Symes Ward Collins Hogg Witheford. Colvin Hornsby Houston Duncan Ell Kaihau Tellers. Field Heke McGowan Fisher Meredith O'Meara. NOES, 17. Lethbridge Smith, G. J. Allen, J. Atkinson Massey Tanner Fowlds McNab Thompson, R. Monk Herries Tellers. Rhodes Hutcheson Fraser, A. L. D. Laurenson Russell, W. R. Lang. Majority for, 17. Amendments agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Clause 30 .- Partition of Arapaoanui Block declared void. On the motion of Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister), the second proviso was struck out. Clause 32 .- For hearing by the Native Appellate Court of the investigation of the Poukawa Block. On the motion of Mr. CARROLL (Native  Minister), this clause was struck out. Clause 38 .-- Grant of land, Milford Sound, to H. K. Taiaroa authorised. On the motion of Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister), this clause was struck out. Clause 43 .- " Native Land Court Act, 1894," amended. Subsection (a) .- " A will shall not be deemed an alienation within the meaning of subsection ten of section fourteen thereof so as to bar the operation of the said subsection. Any decision of the Court or Appellate Court heretofore given to the contrary is hereby annulled, unless transmission under the will has been registered under the Deeds Registration or Land Transfer Acts, and the interest thereby created has in the meantime been dealt with." Mr. HALL (Waipawa) moved to strike out the words from "Any decision " to the end of the subsection. Amendment agreed to. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) moved to strike out the clause. The Committee divided on the question, "That the clause be retained." AYES, 32. Allen, J. Duncan Hall-Jones Buddo Field Heke Carncross Herries Fraser, W. Carroll Gilfedder Hogg Collins Graham Hornsby Colvin Hall Lang Russell, W. R. Willis. McGowan Mills Seddon Tellers. Smith, G. J. Fraser, A. L. D. Monk Palmer Thomson, J. W. Houston. NOES, 23. Allen, E. G. Russell, G. W. Kaihau Symes Arnold Laurenson Lethbridge Tanner Atkinson Mckenzie, R. Thompson, R. Barclay McNab Witheford. Fisher Tellers. Flatman Meredith Ell Guinness Millar Hutcheson Parata O'Meara. Majority for, 9. Clause as amended agreed to. Bill reported, and read a third time. RESERVES AND OTHER LANDS SALE, DISPOSAL, AND ENABLING AND PUB- LIC BODIES EMPOWERING BILL .. Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) moved the second reading of the Bill. When the Bill was in Committee he would give any explana- tion that might be required of the various clauses. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) merely wished to say there were several clauses in the Bal which he would like some explanation of in Committee. They might be all right, but. on the face of it, there should certainly be some explanation before the House consented to pass them. Bill read a second time. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 7 .- Power to John Elliot to obtain fresh lease of land, Awakino. The Committee divided on the question. "That the clause be retained." AYES, 36. Mills Allen, E. G. Heke Herries Buddo Monk O'Meara Carncross Hogg Parata Hornsby Carroll Rhodes Colvin Houston Kaihau Seddon Duncan Thomson, J. W. Field Lang Fisher Ward Lawry Fraser, W. Willis. Massey Graham Tellers. McGowan McGuire Guinness Symes Mckenzie, R. Thompson. R. Hall Hall-Jones NOES, 17. Millar Allen, J. Fowlds Smith, G. J. Arnold Hutcheson Laurenson Tanner. Atkinson Lethbridge Barclay Teliers. Flatman Collins McNab Russell, G. W. Meredith Ell Majority for, 19. Clause retained. Clause 13 .- " Whereas section numbered 125 of suburban section numbered 1, of the Parish of Pukekohe, in the Land District of Auckland. containing four acres three roods twenty-four 
<page>1225</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1265</url>
pastoral society's show-ground by warrant pub- lished in the Gazette of the twenty-ninth day of November, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-four, and it is no longer suitable for such show-ground : Be it therefore enacted as fol- lows : -- " The said land may be sold, and the proceeds of such sale used to purchase or to assist in purchasing parts of sections numbered 111, 112, 113, and 121 of section numbered 1 of the said parish, and the Governor may grant such land, when so purchased or acquired, for an estate in fee-simple to the Franklin Agricultural and Pastoral Society, incorporated, without power of sale, in trust for use as a show-ground by the said society : Provided, however, that if at any time the Society ceases to exist, or the Governor is of opinion that it is not using the land for the purposes hereby intended, he may resume it, and it shall thereupon become Crown land available for sale or other disposal." Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) moved to strike out the words from " The said land " to the end of the clause, and to insert the following :- "The said land may be sold, and the pro- ceeds of such sale used to purchase or to assist in purchasing parts of sections numbered 111, 112, 113, and 121 of section numbered 1 of the said parish : Provided, however, that, if at any time the society ceases to exist, the Governor may demand the repayment of the amount of the proceeds of the sale of the aforesaid section numbered 125." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended  32106019788261 agreed to. Clause 32 .- Authorising an investigation into the ownership of Section No. 71, Omaka. Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) moved to strike out the clause. Motion agreed to, and clause struck out. Clause 36 .- Power to surrender present lease and for grant of new lease, New Brighton Tram- way. Mr. TANNER (Avon) moved to strike out the clause. Motion agreed to, and clause struck out. Clause 40 .- Reserve, Waikari Survey Dis- trict, declared Crown land. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) moved to strike out the clause. Motion agreed to, and clause struck out. Clause 41 .- Road-line, Pigeon Bay Survey District, may be closed and sold. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) moved to strike out the clause. The Committee divided on the question, " That the clause be retained." AYES, 26. Allen, J. Fraser, A. L. D. Massey Mckenzie, R. Fraser, W. Atkinson Hall O'Meara Carncross Heke Russell, G. W. Carroll Colvin Herries Russell, W. R. Hornsby Duncan Symes. Tellers. Field Hutcheson Fisher Lawry Lang Lethbridge Fowlds Rhodes. Allen, E. G. Smith, G. J. Kaihau Arnold McGowan Tanner McNab Thompson, R. Buddo Ward Meredith Collins Millar Willis Flatman Witheford. Mills Graham Guinness Monk Tellers. Hall-Jones Palmer Ell Parata Hogg Laurenson. Houston Seddon Majority against, 2. Motion agreed to, and clause struck out. Clause 49. - Authority to erect cairn in memory of late Sir John Mckenzie. Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) moved to strike out the clause. Motion agreed to, and clause struck out. Clause 52 .- " Whereas Section No. 93, Tari- ngatura Survey District, Land District of South- land, containing by admeasurement two acres, more or less, is a quarry reserve, but it is not required for such purpose, and as the Wallace County Council desires to deviate the road giving access to such reserve, it is desirable that power to sell such land should be granted : Be it therefore enacted :-- "The reservation of Section No. 93, Taringa- tura Survey District, Southland Land District, as a quarry reserve is hereby cancelled, and the said section may be disposed of as Crown lands freed from any reservation." Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved to strike out the word "sell," and to insert in lieu thereof the word " lease." Amendment agreed to. Mr. SEDDON moved to strike out the words "disposed of as Crown lands freed from any reservation," and to insert in lieu thereof the word " leased." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Clause 53 .- Validation Court may inquire into and validate certain dealings. Mr. DUNCAN moved to add the following to subclause (d) : "and the Public Trustee may by counsel oppose such application " ; and also the addition of the following subclauses :- "(g.) In cases where the Public Trustee has granted a lease of any of the said sec- tions, the title shall be issued subject to such lease, which is hereby vali- dated in all respects as if such lease had been granted by the person to Rents whom the title is issued. thereafter accruing from the said lease shall be paid by the lessee to the purchaser, and not to the Public Trustee. "(h.) Where the purchaser has acquired a portion only of any section the title to such portion shall be issued to him subject to any lease then in force over the whole section, and the Vali- dation Court shall assess what por- tions of rents from such lease shall be paid to the purchaser and the Public Trustee respectively. 
<page>1226</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1266</url>
fied from all suits, claims, and de- mands by any person in consequence of any injury suffered by any person in consequence of the passing of this Act, or of any order of the Validation Court made under its provisions. " (j.) All lands mentioned in the said Third Schedule, or any portion thereof, which are not found by the Valida- tion Court to have been purchased from the Native owners as aforesaid, or in respect of which any applica- tion shall not have been made as aforesaid within three months after the passing of this Act, shall vest in the Public Trustee in fee-simple under ' The Native Reserves Act, 1882,' and it shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Native Land Court to forward to the District Land Registrar a list of any lands so vesting, and the Dis- trict Land Registrar is hereby em- powered and directed to issue titles to the Public Trustee under ' The Native Reserves Act, 1852,' for all such lands. Such titles shall be issued subject to any leases granted by the Public Trustee." Amendments agreed to. Mr. DUNCAN moved the addition of the following new clause 21A :- New clause 21A .- " All rents derived and to be derived by the Napier Borough Council from the Meeanee and Papakura Domains, situate in the Provincial District of Hawke's Bay, as are  not actually from time to time expended under section seven of 'The Public Domains Act, 1881,' may be applied and administered by the said Napier Borough Council upon the improve- ments of the Botanical Gardens and other public gardens and public reserves within the Borough of Napier." Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay) moved to insert, before the words " Borough of Napier," the words "County of Hawke's Bay and." The Committee divided. AYES, 19. Russell, G. W. Hutcheson Atkinson Buddo Russell, W. R. Lethbridge Meredith Carncross Tanner. Monk Fisher Fowlds Palmer Tellers. Fraser, W. Parata Allen, J. Heke Rhodes Massey. NOES, 29. Allen, E. G. Millar Guinness Arnold Mills Hall O'Meara Hall-Jones Barclay Carroll Hogg Seddon Hornsby Collins Smith, G. J. Duncan Lang Ward Ell Laurenson Willis. Field Tellers. Lawry Flatman Mckenzie, R. Fraser, A. L. D. Graham McNab Symes. Majority against, 10. Amendment negatived, and clause added. Mr. Duncan following new clauses :- New clause 37 .- "Whereas subsection num- bered 2 of section numbered 3 of the Town of Carterton, containing one acre three roods ten perches, is a portion of a reserve set apart for public buildings and other public purposes on the seventeenth day of February, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three : And whereas it is expedient to change the purpose of the afore said portion of the reserve to municipal purposes. and grant the same to the Corporation of the Borough of Carterton : Be it therefore enacted as follows :- "(1.) Subsection numbered 2 of section num- bered 3, Town of Carterton, contait- ing one acre three roods ten perches. is hereby changed from a reserve fer public buildings and other public purposes to a reserve for municipal purposes. " (2.) The Governor may grant in fee-simple. without power of sale, the said suo- section numbered 2 of section num- bered 3 of the Town of Carterton, to the Corporation of the Borough of Carterton as a reserve for municipal purposes." New clause 38 .- "Whereas Harry Slade, of Mokihinui, coal-miner, was killed in an acci- dent at the Blackball Coal-mine in the veir one thousand nine hundred, leaving bis widow and four children destitute, and it is desirable that some provision should be made for them : Be it therefore enacted that the Public Trustee may, out of the moneys in his hands to the credit of the Coal-miners' Relief Fund. make such provision for Rose Marion Slade. the widow, and Ralph Slade, Grace Dempster Slade. Elsie Slade, and Leslie George Haywood Slade. the children of the said Harry Slade, as be thinks fit." Mr. DUNCAN moved, in clause 38, That "Minister of Mines and " be inserted before "Public Trustee." Amendment agreed to, and clauses added. Mr. DUNCAN moved the addition of the following new clause :- "Whereas the land described in the Twelfth Schedule hereto is a portion of land vested in the Public Trustee under the provisions of ' The Auckland Hospital Reserves Act, 1%-%. for the purposes of and subject to the tras's therein mentioned : " And whereas such land is required for a show-ground for agricultural and pastoral pil ?. poses, and it is desirable to set it apart fr such purposes and to grant other land is exchange therefor : Be it therefore enacted as follows : - "(1.) The reservation of the land describe in the Twelfth Schedule hereto, under and for the purposes of 'The Auckland Haspe Reserves Act, 1883,' is hereby cancelled. and the Governor may grant it for an estate in ke- simple, freed from any mortgage or other charge, but subject to any lease or tenancy then existing over the land, to the Auckland Agricultural and Pastoral Association, withce: 
<page>1227</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1267</url>
ground for agricultural and pastoral purposes : Provided, however, that if at any time the association ceases to exist, or the Governor is of opinion that it is not using the land for the purposes hereby intended, he may resume it, and it shall thereupon become Crown land, available for sale or other disposal. " (2.) The Public Trustee shall, before such grant is issued, and with the consent of the Minister of Lands, select Crown land in the Auckland Land District open for sale or selec- tion under ' The Land Act, 1892,' of a value equal to the land described in the Twelfth Schedule hereto, and the Governor shall grant such land to the Public Trustee to be held by him on the same trusts and subject to the same conditions as the land described in the said Schedule is held by him at the date of the pass- ing of this Act ; and if the land in such Schedule is subject to any mortgage or other charge, such mortgage or charge shall thereupon apply to the land so selected, and the District Land Registrar shall make such entries against the titles to the lands as the circumstances require, without any fee or charge." Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) moved to strike out the words "open for sale or selection under ' The Land Act, 1992.' " Amendment agreed to, and new clause as amended added to the Bill. On the motion of Mr. DUNCAN new clauses 55 and 56 were agreed to, namely :- "55. Whereas a certificate of title has been issued in error to Susan Hayes for Lot 45 of Section 1, Small Farms, Panmure, containing two acres and a half, the section having been already Crown-granted to Andrew Bourke, and it is desirable that Lot 48 of the same section, containing two acres and a half, should be granted to George Taylor, the last successor in title of the said Andrew Bourke: Be it there- fore enacted as follows :- " The Governor may by warrant authorise the District Land Registrar to issue without further payment a certificate of title for Lot 48 to the said George Taylor, in full satisfaction for the Crown grant for Lot 45, and such Crown grant shall thereupon become void. "56. Whereas Section 9, Block VI., Village of Torea, Nelson Land District, containing one acre, more or less, was reserved for purposes of public utility : And whereas there are no unlet sections in the said village which can be acquired as a site for a church : Be it there- fore enacted as follows :- " The Governor may cancel the reservation of one rood of Section 9, Block VI., in the Village of Torea, Nelson Land District, and may sell or lease the same for a site for a Presbyterian church as if the same had not been permanently reserved." Mr. O'MEARA (Pahiatua) moved, That the following new clause be added to the Bill :- "Whereas the Crown tenants of Allotments Numbers 16, 17, and 18, Block VI., in the Ao- hanga Survey District, became tenants under the mistake that the public road known as the Wai-o-waka Road was wholly situated on the And whereas this road exists on both sides of the stream : Be it therefore enacted as fol- lows : That so much of the said road as exists between the said allotments and such stream is hereby declared closed, and the land thereof is hereby declared to be Crown land." New clause agreed to. Mr. FIELD (Otaki) moved, That the follow- ing new clause be added to the Bill :- "Section twenty of 'The Public Works Act Amendment Act, 1900,' is hereby amended by inserting next after the words 'the road or street so dedicated,' in subsection three thereof, the words 'in such manner and to such extent as may be agreed upon between the owner and the local authority.' "Section twenty-one of 'The Public Works Act Amendment Act, 1900,' is hereby repealed." The Committee divided. AYES, 20. Gilfedder Massey Allen, J. Monk Atkinson Guinness Hall Rhodes Barclay Herries Collins Symes. Fisher Tellers. Hutcheson Field Fowlds Lang Fraser, W. Fraser, A. L. D. Lawry NOES, 23. Russell, W. R. Allen, E. G. Hornsby Buddo Seddon Laurenson Thompson, R. Carroll McGowan Ward Duncan Mckenzie, R. Meredith Flatman Willis. Graham Millar Tellers. Ell Hall-Jones Mills Tanner. Hogg O'Meara Majority against, 3. Clause negatived. Mr. W. FRASER (Wakatipu) moved the. addition of the following new clause :- " Whereas Messrs. George Boritt and T. J. Pearce are in possession of sections num- bered 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9, of Block I., Lower Wanaka District, Land District of Otago, con- taining by admeasurement two hundred and twenty-three acres and thirty-nine perches, and which were originally demised to them or their predecessors in title as agricultural leases. under ' The Mines Act, 1877,' or previous Acts granting agricultural leases on goldfields : Be it enacted with respect to each of them that he shall be entitled, on the recommendation of the Land Board, to a Crown grant for the land in his possession as aforesaid without further payment, if and when the aggregate of the payments made by him in respect of rent of such land amounts to the capital value of the land." Clause read a second time, and added to the Bill. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) moved the addition of the following new clause :- " Whereas Mary Ellen Boler, Eliza Ann Boler, Edward Theophilus Boler, and Alfred Storey Boler selected on the eleventh day of ! November, one thousand eight hundred and 
<page>1228</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1268</url>
of Tauhoa, situated in Block III., Tauhoa Sur- vey District, Land District of Auckland, con- taining by admeasurement one hundred and twenty-one acres or thereabouts, under the Homestead Regulations of .The Auckland Waste Lands Act, 1874,' which, among other things, provide that selectors must erect a dwellinghouse and must reside personally on the land selected by them for five years from the date of selection : And whereas the per- sons hereinbefore mentioned resided with their parents on lands contiguous to that selected by them, and have not therefore erected a dwellinghouse or resided on the said land ; but, as the conditions of the selection have been otherwise complied with, it is desirable to waive the conditions as to residence and the erection Be it there- of a dwellinghouse on the land : fore enacted as follows :- "The Governor may grant to Mary Ellen Boler, Eliza Ann Boler, Edward Theophilus Boler, and Alfred Storey Boler, or their legal representatives, in fee-simple, section num- bered 92 of the Parish of Tauhoa, situate in Block III., Tauhoa Survey District, Land Dis- trict of Auckland, containing by admeasure- ment one hundred and twenty-one acres or thereabouts." Clause read a second time, and added to the Bill. Mr. TANNER (Avon) moved the addition of the following new clause :- "The lands set apart as a recreation-ground for the inhabitants of the Borough of Lyttelton and the Road District of Heathcote, as de-  cribed in the Schedule to 'The Lyttelton and Heathcote Recreation-ground Act, 1877,' are hereby brought under the operation of ' The Public Domains Act, 1881,' and the provisions of that Act shall apply accordingly." Clause read a second time, and added to the Bill. Mr. LAWRY (Parnell) moved the addition of the following new clause : - " Whereas the Auckland Grammar School Board, under section ten of 'The Public Bodies' Powers Act, 1887,' reduced the rent payable by the lessee of the Exchange Hotel in Parnell, and the period of reduction has expired : And whereas it is expedient that such reduction should continue : Be it there- fore enacted as follows :- " (1.) The said Board is hereby empowered to reduce or increase the rent of the said hotel from the expiry of the reduction-period as it thinks fit to arrange with the lessee. " (2.) The said Board is also empowered out of its general funds to pay to its members their reasonable travelling- expenses in attending the meetings of the Board, the expenses to be paid according to a scale to be approved by the Governor." Clause read a second time, and added to the Bill. Mr. GRAHAM (Nelson City) moved the fol- lowing new clause :-- Mr. Monk hereto is hereby constituted a road district under ' The Road Boards Act. 1882,' by the name of the 'Croiselles Road District.' and there shall be a Road Board for such district, to consist of six members. "(1.) The Governor shall appoint the day for the first election of the members of the Board, and the day of the first meeting of the Board, and may make all necessary appointments for the preparation of rolls and otherwise for carry- ing out such election. "(2.) For the first election the Governor shall appoint some fit person to prepare a rali of all persons who, being resident on the land described in the said Schedule, are entitled to vote at any election for a member of the House of Representatives; and any person appearing on such roll shall be deemed to be an elector for the purposes of such first election, and to be eligible for election as a member of the Board. " (3.) The person appointed to prepare the roll shall be the Returning Officer at such first election, and he shall be paid by the Board such remuneration for his services as the Gu- vernor shall determine. " (4.) The members elected at such first election shall come into office on their election : but, for the purposes of section thirty-one of 'The Road Boards Act, 1882,' and of section three of ' The Road Boards Act 1882 Amend- ment Act, 1883,' the time of their election shall count as from the first week in May, one thousand nine hundred and two." Motion for second reading of new clause negatived. Bill reported, and read a third time. # MIDLAND RAILWAY COMPANY. INTERRUPTED DEBATE. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- For the purpose of getting the evidence and report printed. I beg to move, That notice of motion No. 4, as follows, be considered :- "That the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the New Zealand Midland Rsil- way Company do lie upon the table, and bo referred to the Government ; and the amend. ment proposed thereto, To omit all the words after the word ' Railway,' and insert the works ' be referred back to the Committee for recon- sideration." " Mr. FISHER .- Is any Bill to be founded on the report ? Mr. SEDDON .- It is too late this session. Mr. FISHER .- Then, we may as well pu the report in the fire. Mr. SEDDON .- I desire to say that. after the work of the Royal Commission, and after the report of the Public Accounts Committe. we should lay the report upon the table : ard it is only just to Mr. Coates and those ass- ciated with him, who have been condueneg the case on behalf of the debenture-hellers. Although the resolution probably may not be entirely satisfactory, I think it will be admitted as far as he and they could promote the in- terests of the debenture-holders that has boys done. Mr. Dalston, on behalf of the share 
<page>1229</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1269</url>
position before the Commission and the Com- mittee. Motion agreed to. On the question, That the words proposed to be struck out stand part of the question, Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) asked, By the passing of the motion do we commit the House to the report ? Mr. SEDDON .- No. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) .- When the honourable member for Wairarapa is a few years older he will know not to put such an innocent question to the Premier. Mr. Coates and Mr. Dalston, as representing the debenture- holders, have represented their principals before the Public Accounts Committee in a most able manner. The persons they have represented will not have the least possible complaint in re gard to them and their action in this colony. The only complaint that can be urged in the interests of the debenture-holders and share- holders of the company, if any complaint is urged at all, will be that the investigations of the Committee and the report of the Com- mittee were not followed up, as every one who took part in the investigations thought would be the case, by the introduction of a Bill to give effect to the report of the Committee. Although I spoke against the report 12.0. as presented to the House, I was in a minority of one. Every member of the Committee present was against me, and, as the report was carried by that large majority in the Committee, so I believe the report would  have been adopted by an equally large majority in the House. I believe the feeling of Parlia- ment was in favour of the introduction and the passing of a Bill to give effect to the recom- #cc-zero mendations of the Committee. It is not, therefore, the fault of the Committee that a Bill to give effect to that report has not been introduced. All the members of the Com- mittee -I speak subject to correction - be- lieved that the report of the Committee would have been followed by the introduction of a Bill. The Government appears to have taken no step whatever in the matter. We, the members of the Committee, and we, the mem- bers of the House, are not in a position to say what the intentions of the Government may be in the matter. The honourable gentleman ap- pears to have reserved to himself the right to say that no Bill shall be introduced, and I think, in taking that course, he is not giving effect to the wishes of Parliament. There may be in certain directions, in the minds of some members of the House, a feeling that the com- pany was entitled to no consideration what- ever. I am of that opinion, but I am not in a majority. I am not answerable for the delay in the introduction of the Bill, nor are the members of the Committee. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) .- Sir, I have no desire to make any speech. I simply asked a question through you as to whether, by the adoption of this resolution, the House would in any way be committed to the payment to the Midland Railway shareholders and debenture- VOL. CXIX .- 79. commended by the Public Accounts Com- mittee ? That is all I want to know. I want to have a distinct reply to that if I can get it. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton). - Sir, when the report of the Public Accounts Com- mittee was brought down the other day I gathered from the tone of the Premier's remarks that the Government were going to bring in a Bill for the settlement of this problem on the lines of the report of the Committee. The right honourable gentleman proposed to pay the amount of $130,000 in three-per-cent. deben- tures, and I certainly thought, before the House rose, that this business would be done with and settled once and for all on the lines of the Premier's statement-namely, that the persons interested, whether debenture-holders or share- holders, should be asked to sign a document accepting the amount given by Parliament as a final, absolute, and irrevocable settlement of the whole thing. I am disappointed, after the sug- gested statement of the Right Hon. the Pre- mier, that no settlement is to be come to, and that next session we shall have to face the whole situation over again. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- I do not wish to prolong debate or provoke it, but I must in defence state that, so far as the Govern- ment are concerned, the fact of the resolution on the report of the Committee being talked out, the Government never had an opportunity to get the report at all. It was not the fault of the Government that the other day the matter was talked out till half-past five. It was only after the report was laid on the table that the Government could deal with it. Speaking to the amendment to refer the report back to the Public Accounts Committee, I say that would be of no service, because, with the threatened opposition and stonewall, and with the time at our disposal, it will be too late to do any- thing this session. This I regret, for the Com- mittee was almost unanimous in making the re- commendation, Only one member of the Com- mittee, the member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher), was opposed to the report, and vet to- night, strange to say, he appears to find fault with the Government because they had not brought down a Bill, although it is a Bill to which the honourable gentleman is opposed. There is an inconsistency there that I really cannot understand or appreciate. I may say there is a majority of members, I believe, in favour of an offer being made as recom- mended by the Committee. Although there is no liability whatever on the part of the colony, yet, considering all the circumstances, I think we ought to be generous, and do something in the way of softening the blow to those who have lost their money. Mr. HORNSBY .- There is a large number of members opposed to that. Mr. SEDDON. - Yes; and, considering the report of the Committee came down two days before the session expired, even supposing it had not been talked out until half past five, and that the Government could have acted upon it, I say the period of the session is too late to 
<page>1230</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1270</url>
have done anything. On account of the num- ber of members who have intimated to me that they are opposed to this course, it would have been futile for the Government to have at- tempted to pass a Bill. I have been told I am not meeting the wishes of Parliament by the member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher), who opposes in toto anything being given to the debenture-holders or the shareholders. I say, in the course taken, I have not been at all treating him with discourtesy. I consider, if the Government this session do nothing, those who have consistently opposed any action in this direction being taken should be the last to raise an objection. However, Sir, the matter would stand over. In the meantime, I do not think anything will occur to prejudice either the position of the colony or the position of shareholders and debenture-holders. I consider the present situation, under all the circum- stances, is one that will allow us to approach the matter next session, and to deal with it, as I hope, straightforwardly and in the interests of all concerned. It is one of those matters, I think, which ought to be dealt with and put out of the way, and, unless something arises which would render it unwise to proceed, so far as I am concerned, early next session a Bill will be submitted to give effect to the Committee's recommendation. I may almost say I nearly lost my seat in the Ministry through the Mid- land Railway. and I have done my best for many years to uphold the honour of the colony and to keep the colony from a very heavy loss. Now that we have arrived at such a position that we can be generous, having vindicated our position, we should show we are not un- generous or unmindful of what the share- holders and debenture-holders have done and have lost. Taking all the circumstances into consideration, I think it will be admitted the Government is prepared to do what is right, and, instead of being twitted with flaunting the opinion of Parliament, one should be entitled to some little credit for the situation that, I say, has been brought about to a very great extent by the action of the present Govern- ment. Amendment negatived, and motion agreed to, "That the report of the Public Accounts Committee do lie on the table, and be referred to the Government." Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved, That the report, evidence, and minutes of proceedings of the Committee be printed. Motion agreed to. MANAWATU RAILWAY SALE AND PUR- CHASE EMPOWERING BILL. A message was received from His Excellency the Governor, transmitting a draft of this Bill, and recommending the House to make provision accordingly. On the question. That the message be referred to the Committee of the Whole, Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said, -- Sir, I know the introduction of this Bill is a welcome sur- prise to honourable members. I was unable to bring it down before. The intention is to give Mr. Seddon the Government an opportunity during the next few months of purchasing the line on the terms stated, on the acceptance of which the Government are prepared to take up the com. pany's debentures, which amount to 46-0,000. and, in addition, to give 3os. per share for 170,000 shares, which means about $25,000. the colony in return obtaining the railway, rolling-stock, land, and all assets. I have every reason to hope that ere Parliament meets again the purchase will have been com- pleted. Mr. TANNER (Avon) .- Are you taking over the debenture liability ? Mr. SEDDON .- Yes : we take over the deben. ture liability. Negotiations have been going on for some time, and I have not had the opper- tunity prior to this to bring down the measure. Indeed. it was only this afternoon that the final revision between the chairman of directors and myself took place. At the same time I think the colony should be congratulated on a pro- spect of this matter being brought to a success- ful issue. Motion agreed to. Resolution agreed to, reported to the House and agreed to, and Bill read a first time. On the question, That the Bill be now read a second time, Mr. SEDDON (Premier). - Sir. this Bill is to empower the acquisition of the assets of the Manawatu Railway Company, and the decision has been come to after due consideration. The measure itself is a purely machinery one to enable those negotiations to be completed- completed on lines that I am sure will be ap. proved by honourable members. I consider that to have the company walk out and the Government walk in and take over the railway as a going concern on the terms mentioned in the Bill is fair to the company and the share- holders and in the best interests of the colony. I have little further to say. The question is now for the shareholders to decide. li they like to take the maximum amount we are po pared to offer, it will, of course, be for us to enter into the agreement. If they do not de ») no harm is done. At the same time I do this it is in the interests of the colony that all lines of railway should belong to the State. At all events, taking into consideration the terms and conditions, and the whole contreet and the conditions we have under the Bi- conditions that are likely to be successfuly accomplished-it will be for all concerned to say that it is a business transaction condarted on business lines, and, if accomplished as !! . vided by the Bill, it will be for the good of the colony, while the company will have no reas a to regret the sale. I move the second reading of the Bill. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay). - S. I beg to move, That this Bill be read this da; six months. If there is but one honourale member who will tell with me we will hast c a division. I do not propose to speak at aty length on the Bill. When I look at the class I see it is not quite one hour since the BH was introduced. We have not had time ever w 
<page>1231</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1271</url>
read it. We are asked now to authorise the expenditure of, in round numbers, a million of money - ¥951,845 - but honourable members have not been able to devote five minutes' at- tention to decide whether the expenditure is a wise one. Mr. ATKINSON. - There are only about thirteen clauses. Captain RUSSELL. - Yes; fancy, only thirteen clauses! Can anybody say that the rapid introduction of unintelligible clauses in the several Bills we have had submitted to us to night are creditable to us as a Legislative Assembly ? Undoubtedly they are not. Not one member of the House, even the Ministers themselves, have any idea of the effect of the two Bills we passed so rapidly through Com- mittee this evening. It is impossible anybody could know. And does anybody know the ef- fects of this Bill, or understand its provisions ? Have they compared the possibilities of pur- chase under this Bill with the possibilities under " The Railways Construction and Land Act, 1881 "? I would ask, Why is the basis of purchase fixed at 30s. per share, when there is in this Chamber at the present moment a quotation of Manawatu Railway Company's shares at 24s .? Is that a right and a proper basis? It may be right ; there may be an explanation, but we know nothing about it. The Premier, in introducing the Bill, gave us no information whatsoever. He said, " Here is the Bill, and I think it will prove satisfactory to the colony and to the share- holders." I have no doubt it will be extremely  satisfactory to the shareholders, but whether it should be satisfactory to the colony is quite another matter. Now, I desire again to draw attention to the fact that this Bill has not been #cc-zero in our hands more than one hour, and yet we are asked to pass it through all its stages. Last year when the Bill was introduced it was brought in on the 13th October, and read a first and second time on that day and put into Committee, and read a third time on the 17th October. That is to say, in four days we finished the Bill deal- ing with the question, and then, as now, no member had time to study the subject. I, fortunately, was able to give a short time to the consideration of the Bill, and I prepared a certain number of facts and figures in connec- tion with the railway, and if I had only one hour to spare, to have read through my speech of last year, I should have been able to put the case properly before the House. Under the provisions of " The Railways Construction and Land Act, 1881," the colony has a right to take over the Manawatu Railway at the cost of its construction, less depreciation, but plus a percentage of 5 per cent. or 10 per cent. Mr. SEDDON .- Ten per cent. Captain RUSSELL .- Five per cent. if the line was taken within a period of fourteen years after its completion, and 10 per cent. if beyond that time. I presume that the period of four- teen years has passed, and therefore we shall have to pay 10 per cent. ; but the depreciation and the 10 per cent. will about balance each other-that is to say, the depreciation of the rolling-stock and the inevitable wear-and-tear would in all probability amount to about 10 per cent. There is to be no premium paid on taking over the railway, and it is simply taken over as a going concern, but at the cost of its construction at the time of its building. Ac- cording to the figures which I gave last year- and they were fairly accurate, I have very good reason to believe-1 made out the actual cost to the colony to be about $600,000 under the provisions of clause 117 of " The Railways Con- struction and Land Act, 1881." I may have been wrong by 100,000-let us suppose even $200,000; but that would only bring the cost of the railway to the colony, if taken under "The Railways Construction and Land Act, 1881," to be $800,000 at the very outside ; but I believe it would not exceed three-quarters of a million, instead of, in round numbers, the million pounds which we are asked to pay for it under the provisions of this Bill. There is another point which should be alluded to, and that is, we have to take over debentures amount- ing in value to $650,000, which have a currency of seven years at 5 per cent. interest. The Pre- mier has told us that in a very short time he hopes to be able to borrow money at 3 per cent. on the London market. Therefore the amount we should have to pay on the debentures as interest in excess of the rate we can borrow at will amount to $100,000 during their currency, which properly will have to be added to the cost of the purchase of the railway. In all proba- bility we should be able to take over the railway under the existing Act at a cheaper rate than under this proposal. I hope the Minister will explain to the House how it is the Government propose a thirty-shillings share basis for pur- chase, when the selling value of the shares is about 24s. These are doubts which occur to my mind to urge why we should pause and consider what we are doing before we pass this Bill. But the principle of saying that a Legis- lative Assembly should debate a question of purchasing a railway at a cost of a million of money without any notice is one we ought not to tolerate. There is no doubt that the negotia- tions have been completed for several days ; the Premier has been too busy for the last few days to enter into negotiations for the purchase of any railway. The whole scheme has been cut and dried for a fortnight or more, and this Bill has been intentionally kept back. Mr. SEDDON .- No. Captain RUSSELL .- I hold to my opinion that it has been intentionally kept back, and it is forced on the House at an hour when Minis- ters know we cannot give proper consideration to the subject. On many occasions I have said it is advisable that we should acquire the line, and I still hold that opinion, but it ought to be done on business lines. Would any private person dream of conducting his own business in such a manner ? Of course not. It is mon- strous that such a proposition should be put before us. I am so convinced of the impropriety of the proposition that I move, That this Bill be read a second time this day six months. 
<page>1232</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1272</url>
The honourable gentleman who has just sat down is fully entitled to his own opinion as to what is the right course to pursue on such an important mat er. But I should like to point out that the question of acquiring the line is not a recent one. For years past a number of people have been advocating the acquisition of the railway in the interests of the colony, and during last session statutory authority was given to the Government to enter into negotia- tions on certain conditions. The honourable gentleman seems to imagine there has been some motive in keeping the Bill back till this evening. That is quite a mistake. The nego- tiations have been proceeding for some time. It is a matter of history that we were leading up to definite terms in our negotiations when the Financial Statement was ready for delivery. There was a paragraph prepared and in the Statement bearing on it, and, in consequence of the chairman of the Manawatu directors at the last moment not being in a position to place any proposals before the Government, we had to take out the paragraph before submitting the Statement to the House. I am not disclosing any confidential business when I say that negotiations have been going on between a large body of the shareholders and the directors of the company here, and that some of the directors are opposed to the sale of the line to the colony on the terms sub- mitted. But I believe-or, at least, we are so informed-that the majority of the share- holders in the Old Country, and here also, are desirous of selling the railway at the price we have declined to go beyond-that is. 30s. per share. We only received information this morning from the chairman of the company that he expected he would be in a position to sell the railway to the Government on the basis of 30s. a share, and the Government then felt the House should be apprised, and submitted a Bill at once. More than that we could not do. Now, Sir, the whole point is, Is it a good thing for the colony to acquire that railway on the basis of 30s. per share upon 170,000 shares, or is it preferable to acquire it under the existing law, by which we would have to pay 10 per cent. on the cost of the construction of the rail- way? What would that amount to? We would have to add 10 per cent. to $762,751, making $839.026. Captain RUSSELL .- No. Sir J. G. WARD .- Pardon me, that is so. If you look at the cost of the railway and rolling- stock- - Captain RUSSELL .- That is the value, not the cost. Sir J. G. WARD .- It is not the value. It will cost the colony that. The position has been investigated by responsible officers, who went into the whole matter, and, according to the officers who furnished the Government with their report, it would cost the colony many thousands more if we took the railway as pro- vided under the Act than by giving 30s. per share. What the Government desires is to acquire the railway at the lowest possible cost had claimed as being the cost it would cost us $1,045,288, and that would not include the land, for under the Act the land is exempted. No Government ought to go in for the acquisi- tion of the Manawatu Railway Company piece- meal. Any sale should include land, railway, rolling.stock, and its business. Under the pro- posals the Government are negotiating. the total cost to the colony will be $943,000, as against $1.015,288 if the company's contention was up- held, and without the land ; and if honoura! le members will look at the schedule of the land they will find that the unsold land amounts to $51,000, irrespective of the amount due by the purchasers, which comes to another $51,000. so that we would run the risk of being $100.000 worse off by acquiring the property under that Act, as advocated by the honourable member. It had been admitted that this great highway to Palmerston should be acquired at a reasonable price to the colony. In the first place the chairman of the company had asked 35s. per share, and afterwards 32s. 6d. per share. That We said was declined by the Government. that the colony would not entertain business at more than 30s. per share, and neither will we. If they do not like to take that they can keep it. We can then run our own line as we think fit, and without having to be everlastingly told we are interfering with the Manawatu Com- pany's business or rates. We want to reduce our rates further, and intend to do so. If we do so now we are told it is not fair to the Mana- watu Company, and that we are trying to force them to sell. We are not trying to do anything of the kind. We are prepared to pay what we believe is the fair value, and beyond that we will not go. When they get a fair offer for their property, if they refuse it such arguments as to what we do regarding the lowering of rates on our own lines cannot apply. The honourable member said that a member had had a quota- tion of 24s. per share. Well, that honourable member should tell all he knows about that quotation. As a matter of fact, the whole trouble has been that the shares in the Mana- watu Railway Company have, I understand, for some time past been held by very few people. who have collared all the shares offering, and we are informed that there are not more than 10 per cent. of the shares on the market at the present time; and these shareholders have been standing out to get 35s. per share, and then 32s. 6d. per share. The whole position is this : The responsible officer of the Railway Department, Mr. Hudson, went into the matter in every possible way, and upon the calculs- tions that have been submitted the course pro- posed now is the best and safest for the colony. Now, the whole question is, Is it a good than; for the colony to acquire this railway? If it is a good thing to acquire the railway, is the price of 30s. per share a fair price for the cary to pay to enable us to own and work that rail. way ? An Hon. MEMBER. -- How long have the de- bentures to run ? Sir J. G. WARD. -- About seven years ; and 
<page>1233</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1273</url>
it would be a good thing to acquire the rail- way at 30s. per share, though there is no need for us to break our necks to get it. We can do without it very well. On the other hand, if the colony should elect to allow the railway to remain in the hands of the company, you have the people of the North Island, who have been clamouring all along to have the line handed over to the State. While the Government have been negotiating with the view of acquiring the railway we have not been able hitherto to say that we were satisfied that any offer was one we could submit to Parliament as a fair proposal ; and now, when we have what we believe to be, and are satisfied is, a fair basis upon which to accept it, the honourable gentleman says the matter should be allowed to stand over. Captain RUSSELL .- I said we ought to have had more time to consider it. Sir J. G. WARD .- We have never been in a position to submit anything definite until to- day. It is only to-day that the chairman of directors has put us in the position of being able to introduce this Bill. The clause which we have prepared, and which is printed in the Bill, was in the Budget until the very day the Budget was introduced, and it was only with- drawn at the last moment before the Budget was submitted to the House, as we could not get the chairman to affirm the proposal ; other- wise honourable members would have had ample time to debate it to their heart's con- tent. The matter is an important one to the  colony, and, now that we have an opportunity of acquiring it, the Government consider it their duty, even at this late hour of the session, to place the matter fully and fairly before the   House. I have briefly stated the position. I, of course, know the difficulties in the way of going into all the details at short notice, but it has been quite unavoidable. I hope honour- able members will, after due consideration, make up their minds either to pass the mea- sure or to negative it, and by their action decide whether the line is to become part of the State system or not. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) .- I quite agree, Sir, with the Hon. the Minister for Railways that it is necessary that the colony should purchase this railway; but what one objects to is that a Bill of this nature should be brought down when the House is about to break up in five or six hours. It is quite impossible for any man at a moment's notice to discover from the clauses of this Bill whether the proposed arrangement is a fair one or not, or whether the arrangement provided for under the Act of 1881 is a better one. I cannot say, and I defy any one except the honourable member for Hawke's Bay, who has gone carefully into the Act of 1881, to say which is the better arrangement with only an hour's notice. I submit it is better for us at this late stage to postpone the Bill to next year in order to have time to justify us in taking on our own shoulders our own responsibilities, for it is a responsibility to every member of this House. We should know what we are doing in | close on a million of money. The Minister for Railways has said that the proposals in the Act of 1881 would not be as favourable as these. He may be right-I do not say he is not-but certainly his speech is wrong, for he led the House to believe that the cost of the railway, as assessed under the Act of 1881, was the cost of construction without any depreciation. That was wrong. Sir J. G. WARD .- I did not say so. Mr. J. ALLEN .- The honourable gentleman did not say it in words, but his speech was so plain that every honourable member could see he meant it. He estimated the cost of the. railway at £950,000. Captain RUSSELL .- And he did not allude. to the interest-charges. Mr. J. ALLEN .- That is so. The honour- able gentleman alluded to the cost of the rail- way at £950,000, and added 10 per cent. to that, and said the railway would cost over a million under the Act of 1881. Sir J. G. WARD .- So it would. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Nonsense. Sir J. G. WARD .- I can show you the whole thing worked out by responsible officers. Mr. J. ALLEN .- I do not care how it is worked out. The Act of 1881 specifically pro- vides for depreciation. In clause 117 of "The Railways Construction and Land Act, 1881." it says, "The arbitrators shall also take into consideration the depreciation in the perma- nent-way, plant, and rolling-stock, buildings, and other works of the railway." One can get at the value of the railway, less depreciation, in the schedule to the Bill, and it comes to $761,000. Now, add 10 per cent. to that. Sir J. G. WARD .- You are quite wrong. Mr. J. ALLEN .- I cannot say whether I am right or wrong. I can only take the facts as they appear in the schedule, which purports to be the assets of the Manawatu Railway, according to their own estimation, and they have got a value of £761,000. Ten per cent. on that is another £76,000, and the value, accord- ing to that estimation, is £830,000, and we are proposing to give £951,000. Sir J. G. WARD. - You are entirely wrong. Mr. SEDDON. - There is #100,000 for land. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Does the Bill include the land ? Mr. SEDDON .- Yes. Mr. J. ALI.EN .- I do not see it; and I say that we ought to have time to consider, in an important Bill like this, whether it does in- clude the land or not. I do not know whether the Bill includes and takes over the other assets, such as railway stores, and sundry debtors and cash balances. Mr. SEDDON .- Yes, everything, you will find on the paper. Mr. J. ALLEN .- All I can say is, it does not provide for anything so far as I can sec. Mr. BARCLAY .- What about the reserve of £76,000? Mr. J. ALLEN .- Yes; but it is not here in the schedule, which purports to be a statement of the assets of the company. There is another 
<page>1234</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1274</url>
rect statement of the assets of the company? Nobody is able to prove it. It has not been before the Public Accounts Committee or any other Committee of the House, and we cannot tell whether it is correct or not. The member for Dunedin City (Mr. Barclay) says there is a reserve fund of $76,000, which is not shown here at all in the statement of assets. Well, I say, to ask us to legislate in a way like this, dealing with a million of the colony's money, Seems to be the very height of absurdity, and I cannot understand why we should be asked to do it at this late hour. The Premier says he could not bring it down before, but the news- papers have been teeming for some time past, at any rate, with what purports to be the fact that the Premier was willing to offer 30s. a share. If the Premier had that in his mind, why did he not bring this Bill down at an earlier stage, and then we would have been in a position to authorise negotiations with the Manawatu Railway Company ? Mr. FISHER. - What is the use of asking why, unless you can get them in a vice ? Mr. J. ALLEN .- The only way to get him in a vice is to say that the Bill shall not go through. I shall have to thoroughly discuss it, and understand what every single clause means. I would like to ask if any commission is to be paid. Mr. SEDDON .- No. Mr. J. ALLEN .- None whatever? Mr. SEDDON .- No. Mr. ATKINSON .- Who to? Mr. J. ALLEN .- I do not know. But it does seem to me that the basis of the calcula- tion is made upon this statement of the assets, and that the statement of the assets is in- correct. And if that is so, then the whole Bill may be on a false foundation. I cannot understand why members can consent to passing legislation of this kind, and I do sub- mit there can be no harm, having got to this stage of the session, in waiting another six months-at any rate, until the early part of next session. We shall be meeting again in about six months' time or a little more, and if the Right Hon. the Premier is going to the Coronation we may be meeting in three or four months ; but, at the very latest, we shall be meeting in seven months' time. Now, what harm can there be in delaying the negotia- tions-in fact, the negotiations may go on, but what harm can there be in delaying an Act authorising the actual purchase for another six or seven months? The negotiations could then be completed and laid before us, and we should have an opportunity of going thoroughly into the matter, and seeing whether the colony is advised to go in for this at a fair price or not. Under the existing conditions it is impossible to say whether what is offered is fair or not. do not know at what price the shares are in the market, but the honourable member for Hawke's Bay said 24s. But how are we to know that ? We ought to have time to find out what is the value of the shares. If the Mr. J. Allen buying " a pig in a poke." Sir J. G. WARD. - I did not make the state- ment that I do not know. I said that not 10 per cent. of the shares are upon the market. Mr. J. ALLEN. - The honourable gentleman \- a short time ago, across the floor of the House, said he did not know; and, if he does not know the market price of the shares, how can he say that 30s. is a fair price ? Mr. SEDDON .- Contrast this arrangement with the present Act. Mr. J. ALLEN .- I say, we cannot contrast it. I have tried in the few minutes I have had the Bill in my hand ; but we have not the de. tails, and cannot contrast it. Mr. SEDDON .- We have had them com- pared. Mr. J. ALLEN .- It may be satisfactory to you, but not to the members of the House ; and it is not right for us to accept even a Minister's statement that this is correct. We ought to prove it to ourselves. When dealing with such a huge amount of money, I do not think it is right that we should be asked to decide within a few moments. This Bill ought to have been on the table of the House some days ago. Sir J. G. WARD .- We had not the au- thority. Mr. J. ALLEN .- What authority have you now that you had not a month ago ? Mr. FISHER .- It will not be necessary for him soon to bring it here at all : he will do it himself. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Of course, he may do many things himself, and may do this as he does with the estimates - get the authority of Parliament after he has done it. That is one way of doing these things ; but I submit there can be no great harm if the Bill is allowed to go over till next session, and until we have an opportunity of looking into the matter. I do not feel inclined to vote for the second reading. for I may be voting entirely wrong. We have had no opportunity of looking into the thing in such a manner as to satisfy ourselves whether it is right or wrong. For instance. here is clause 6, in which is stated the basis of the agreement. I cannot tell whether that is a satisfactory basis or not. Then, clause 6 says,- "The values specified in the Schedule herete. which have been represented by the company to be the correct values of the correspond- ing assets as on the thirtieth day of August. one thousand nine hundred and one, shall be deemed to form the basis of the agreement for sale and purchase, and the purchase-money shall be computed and the rights of the parties under the agreement shall be regulated accord- ingly." Apart altogether from that basis of agree- ment, I suppose what led to the directors of I the company intimating to the Premier that they were prepared to consider the agreement is that an additional $16,845 is to be paid by way of purchase-money. The colony is to take that liability upon itself. 
<page>1235</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1275</url>
-company are opposed to the sale. Mr. J. ALLEN .- We are told now that the directors of the company are opposed to the sale. Well, where is the agreement ? It seems to me the thing is wholly wrong, and I hope members will delay consideration of the Bill till next session. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton). - Sir, this Bill is so important that it appears to me it is the duty of the House to carefully scrutinise its provisions. In the first place, we are asked to take a responsibility on the part of the colony of about a million of money in con- nection with the purchase of the railway. I admit the importance of this piece of railway to the North Island system, but I am not pre- pared at this hour of the morning, and in the very expiring hours of the session, to say that, on the bald and bare statements made to the House, Parliament should saddle the colony with this very large responsibility. The Bill proposes that the sum of £1 10s. per share shall be paid on 170,000 shares. Now, I hold in my hand the New Zealand Trade Review and Prices Current, a paper of recognised commercial standing, issued in Wellington. It is dated the 7th November-this very day-and in the line opposite "Manawatu Railway Company " I find the latest market price of the shares is £1 7s. Now, a paper like this is presumably corrected up to date, yet the Government proposes to pay £1 10s. on the whole 170,000 shares. The pre- sumption is that if you buy a small parcel of  fifty or a hundred shares you pay the market rate, but that when you are dealing with the whole of the shares you ought to be able to get a better price than 3s. higher than the market rate. I have also looked up the latest London #cc-zero quotations in the British Australasian, and find that the Home price is from $1 to £1 5s. Now, what is laid before Parliament to show the value in connection with the line? The Minister for Railways says that Mr. Coom and Mr. Hudson have gone into the question and say it is a good purchase. Well, where is their report? Where are the official reports by the Government officers, and by any other experts that the Government might have thought it necessary to obtain to justify Parlia- ment in incurring this large responsibility ? Have we any report as to the life of the rail- way, as to its condition, as to the life of the rolling-stock that may remain, as to whether the lands that are held are of the value set forth in the schedule, and as to whether the balance due on land-purchases is what is stated ? What guarantee is there to the House in any shape or form that this is not buying " a pig in a poke"? I say it is not fair on the part of the Government, in connection with a large and important matter like this, to spring a sur- prise on the House at this hour-a surprise which no one contemplated, and after a number of honourable members have returned to their homes. I do not know what data the Govern- ment have had prepared in connection with this matter, but I know that the statement of the 17th August. It is quite evident that as far back as the 17th August the Government had determined to buy the line ; if complete negotiations had not been entered into, at any rate they had brought them to that point where a balance was struck as to the cash in hand and the value of the stores-and yet the matter is not brought before Parliament until nearly twelve o'clock at night on the very last night of the session. Sir J. G. WARD .- You are a grossly unfair man, and you are misrepresenting the position. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- I decline to submit to the statement of the Minister for Railways that I am deliberately unfair and am grossly mis- representing the position. That statement I leave to be judged by the country. Yet, in the face of what I have stated as to the absence of official reports and the value of the shares, we are told, in the dying hours of the session, that to-day is the first occasion on which the Govern- ment were in a position to bring the matter down. I ask, What loss will be sustained by the colony if this matter is left over until next session ? We should have an impartial investi- gation as to whether these shares are worth 30s. What harm is going to happen by a delay ? The shares are evidently falling in value. Last year 35s. per share was asked ; now there is a prospect of 30s. being ac- cepted. The Government have been fighting the company for a considerable time, and they have endeavoured by their railway arrange- ments to depreciate the value of the company's property. The railway time-tables are so framed as to assist in minimising the value of the com- pany's lines. What harm, I ask, will happen if this matter is postponed to another session ? Sir, the Government should come down as busi- ness-men, and treat us as business-men, and bring before us the data upon which the House may consent to vote this sum. The honourable member opposite referred to the debentures pay- ing 5 per cent. Why, the policy of the Ministry is that our railways shall only pay 3 per cent., and yet for the next six or seven years we will have to carry this €680,000 of 5 per-cent. de- bentures on the back of the colony, and make the railway produce that amount as well as pay working - expenses. I say the House is entitled to see the balance-sheet of the com- pany in order to see whether the revenue of the line is sufficient to pay the 6 per cent. dividend which was paid on the last occasion. Then, we should also have the fullest and most complete schedules of the assets, lands, unpaid purchases, and full particulars as to what the value of those assets are. Lastly, I say we are entitled to have official reports laid on the table of the House as to the condition of the line and as to its value-reports not only by Government ex- perts, but if necessary by experts from outside. Mr. SEDDON .- That has been done. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- The Premier says, " That has been done." Then, why are we not supplied with this data? Members are asked to face a serious responsibility, and, coming 
<page>1236</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1276</url>
would be justified in sticking up this Bill. Mr. SEDDON (Premier). - I am surprised. You may do your best to help the colony, and when you have an opportunity of a great saving and of doing business for the colony, which is in accordance with the wishes of the great majority of members and of the people, you are met in this way. I have here something to make known to members. Here is a para- graph which was prepared for insertion in the Financial Statement, - " Honourable members will recollect that an offer was made last year by this company to sell the line to the Government, together with all assets, on a 6-per cent. term basis, which would have yielded to shareholders about £1 15s. a share. The Government notified the company that they could not entertain the proposal at the price submitted ; that it would be cheaper to take over the line under the existing agreement; and that the Go- vernment would purchase it at a satisfactory figure. Recently the statement of assets and liabilities of the Wellington and Manawatu Railway Company has been submitted to the Government, and there was a prospect of the company being prepared to accept a payment equal to 5 per cent. upon the capital, equal to about £1 11s. 9d. a share, and it would be an advantage as compared with taking over the line under the original agreement. The Go- vernment, however, does not see its way to agree to take over the line on these terms; but the difference between the company and the Government is so small that there is every probability of the House this session being called upon to approve the conditions of pur- chase of the Manawatu Railway by the colony. The taking-over of the Manawatu Railway at the present juncture is somewhat inconsistent with the advice generally tendered throughout the Budget ; but there are exceptions to all rules. There can be no doubt that it would be an advantage to the colony if this line were secured. It is desirable that all railways in this colony should belong to the State, as they can be better controlled and regulated, and confer greater advantages to the public, than under private management and control." At four o'clock in the afternoon of the day the Financial Statement was delivered the Chair- man of the directors informed the Government that a majority of the directors would not sell at £1 11s. 9d. per share. Subsequently, they offered to take £1 12s. 6d. The next thing was, I made a statement when opening one of the bridges on the line, and said the Government had been prepared at the time to offer, subject to con- firmation by Parlament, $1 10s. per share. The next step was, that the company wrote to know whether the Government were still prepared to give 30s. per share. I replied, " Yes, subject to ratification by Parliament "; but I would not submit anything to Parliament until it was intimated to me that there was a prospect of this being agreed to. It was intimated to me that the majority of the directors were not favourable, but there was every reason to Mr. G. W. Russell would be prepared to accept an amount for the assets equal to #1 10s. per share. If, in the face of that, I had taken no action and nothing had been done, and it had leaked out that such an arrangement was possible, why next session I should have been accused of barring the way to acquiring the railway at a reasonable price. What am I to do ? Those who like to take the responsibility to-night, and let this opportunity go by, can do so, so far as I am concerned. I am prepared to do that which is in the best interests of the colony. The last speaker says, " How do we know the statement of the assets is correct ? Have the Government had no re- ports ? " The Government took this 6-per-cent. proposal and had it worked out by the Insur- ance Department, and we find it much better to purchase at the price mentioned in the Bili. and we get the land and all complete by paying a little more. An Hon. MEMBER .- Why not put the papers on the table? Mr. SEDDON .- How can we do that? It was worked out by Mr. Hudson, the railway expert ; and then we had the report by the Engineer-in-Chief and Mr. Napier Bell as to the condition of the rolling-stock and the con- dition of the line, and we were told that every- thing was in very good order. If that report had been laid upon the table of the House it would have fully justified us offering #1 10s. a share : and because I want to deal in a businessike way with a business transaction doubts are cast on the matter by the honourable member. You must rely on the Government of the day. and, if you cannot trust us on a matter of this kind when you require to have the exercise of business aptitude, I simply say you had better get somebody else. It is sickening, when en- deavouring to help the country, and to do the best in the interests of the country, to have these statements made. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL. - We have got our duty to the country as well as you have. Mr. SEDDON .- It is not your duty to asperse the Government. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- I have not done so. Mr. SEDDON .- Probably the honourable member does not understand the English las- guage. I think, sometimes, he does understand it ; on this occasion he said it was his duty. as a member of the House, to stop this business going through. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Yes. Mr. SEDDON .- Why ? Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Give us the infer- mation. Mr. SEDDON .- I cannot with fairness to car officers and the colony give you the whole of the information-and even what I have already sali may have a construction put upon it, that the Manawatu shareholders may say, " We are not prepared to accept your offer." That is exactly the position that, perhaps, the honoursdie member wishes should obtain. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- I understand you to say the directors say that now. 
<page>1237</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1277</url>
do say so. Mr. J. ALLEN .- Who are you treating with, then ? Mr. SEDDON .- Opportunity is given in this Bill to the majority of the shareholders in value to decide, and if a majority of the shareholders in value hold a meeting as provided for in this Bill, and accept our offer for the property, per- mission is given to purchase. But there may be reasons why a director or directors are not prepared to sell, while the shareholders them- selves, by resolution, are prepared to dispose of the property. Now, if you get into a situation of that kind, and if you look at this Bill, you will understand the situation at the present moment. I take now, Sir, as a business-man, a statement of the assets and liabilities in the balance-sheet. The railway and rolling-stock is set down at $952,492 12s. 6d. Very well; of course, there would be interest charged during the time of construction. The directors have since that written off £191,255 4s. 10d., bring- ing the capital value to £761,237 7s. 8d., that is the cost of construction as shown now in the company's statements. If the Government decided to take over the line under the original agreement we should have to add to that 10 per cent., which would bring it up to about £839,000; and issues might arise, and on those issues you must go to arbitration ; and if you do it might cost you more for the line-leaving out the land and the assets altogether --- than what we are paying for it under these pro- posals. I am going to prove that. Taking  £761,237, as shown in the company's books as the cost of the line; to that you must add 10 per cent., and the company would probably wish to add something more. #cc-zero Captain RUSSELL. - Their books have nothing to do with the cost of construction. Mr. SEDDON. That is exactly why I say you cannot definitely take it on the $761,237, with the 10 per cent. added ; other claims might arise, and with arbitration you might be run into a million of money. That is the position. Mr. J. ALLEN .- But we do not know. Mr. SEDDON .- You must take it that, when the Government take the responsibility of sub- mitting a proposal like this to the House, we are not likely to do that unless we have all the information fully before us. Then, there are the freehold lands, $51,221. You have the balance due by land purchase of £51,819. You have the deposit, with accrued interest, of £40,527. Then, you have the railway stores £10,000, and sundry, #2,000. The cash balances amount to £37,269 14s. 11d. These make a total of £954,365 14s. 3d. The liabilities are as follows : Debentures, £680,000; sundry creditors, £4,429 Is. 10d .; debenture interest accrued, $7,265 16s .; appropriation for dividend at 3 per cent. to shareholders for half-year, £5,150 : making a total of #696,844 17s. 10d. ; which deducted from the assets, £954,365 14s. 3d., leaves a balance of assets of £257,520 16s. 5d. This, on 170,000 shares, equals £1 108. 3}d. per share; and I undertake to say that under these terms and conditions it is a little the land and everything, and the line handed over as a going concern. As to taking the other course, I do not blame the honourable member for Hawke's Bay in suggesting what he did, as to dealing with it under the original agreement, but there is a question of doubt in respect to the original cost of construction ; and, from what our own officers say they are prepared to undertake in respect to it, and from the information before us, and from the actuarial working out of the position by the experts, and also by Mr. Hudson and our other officers in the Public Works Department, we can only come to the conclusion that the taking over of the line on the terms mentioned in the Bill will be a good thing for the colony. We say the working of our own lines will be made easier if we do this, and that the very heavy impost on the settlers along the line and those along our own lines, owing to the short- distance rates now charged, will be done away with. Under all the circumstances, I advise the House, even at this late stage of the session, to approve the proposals contained in the Bill. And I believe there is a general disposition on the part of members to accept it. I felt myself some diffidence in bringing the matter forward at this stage of the session, and no one can regret more than I did that the negotia- tions should not have been completed sooner, and that it was thus left to the last moment. I would have made this speech on moving the second reading of the Bill, if I had thought for a moment that the Bill would not be generally accepted ; and if I made a mistake in taking it for granted that it was generally acceptable I hope honourable members will pardon me. Probably, if I had made these remarks then, the Bill would have been through before this. I can only give my assurance to honourable members that this matter has been carefully investigated, and that our experts advised the Government to acquire it if we can get the rail- way at the price proposed. That is the advice given to the Government, and we give it to the House; and when the thing is concluded I am prepared to give members the report of our officers, and if they do not then agree that what we have done is a good thing for the colony, whilst not inflicting any wrong on the shareholders, I hope I shall not remain very much longer on these benches. I could not give any further assurance than that ; and as to the quotations for shares on the market, I do not think there is 10 per cent. on the market. The shares are held, and very firmly held, in London and in this colony by gentlemen who know what the value of the property is. I say, if we miss this opportunity, as time goes on and we extend our own lines of railway and extend our settlement, we are bringing up the value of this property all the time. Captain RUSSELL .- Not under the Act. Mr. SEDDON .- I know what the honour- able member is alluding to. We can certainly reduce rates ; or perhaps the honourable gentle- man refers to the total cost of construction, and that by the Act, it does not matter what the amount of business is, they are tied down 
<page>1238</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1278</url>
at the same time we have to consider that the cost is not a defined quantity. I cannot go into that phase of the question now ; but I say, in respect to the original contract and its terms, conditions, and uncertainties, that the colony would act wisely in avoiding a leap in the dark, for that is what is meant if the Manawatu line is taken under the old agreement. I do not want to depreciate or inflate the value of the pro- perty ; I only want to impress on members that there are good reasons which weigh with the Government, and which has caused Ministers to bring down the Bill; were it otherwise I would never have had my name associated with it, or have brought it down at this late period of the session. I must ask members to take for granted that there are good reasons for passing it. If the House likes to take the responsibility of postponing it for six months, then we wash our hands of all responsibility in respect to it. Mr. W. FRASER .- Is any date fixed in the agreement with the directors within which this offer must be closed ? Mr. SEDDON .- My intention was to fix a date early next year within which the trans- action must be concluded. Mr. W. FRASER .- There is no date fixed just now ? Mr. SEDDON .- No. Mr. W. FRASER .- Has the company con- firmed the offer at present ? Mr. SEDDON .- It has been intimated to the Government by the Chairman of directors that it is his opinion, and he has reasons to support it, that a majority of the shareholders  in value are prepared to take the offer. It is on the strength of that the Government have brought in the Bill. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton). - As a matter of personal explanation, I would like to ask what the Premier meant when he charged me, in the course of his speech, with aspersing the Government, and uttering what he regards as insinuations ? I made no such insinuation, and I want to know what he means ? Mr. SEDDON .- Well, you said that we had a statement here of the assets dated the 17th August, and that for some purpose or other-you did not know what-the Government had kept it back. There was a suggestion there that we had kept it back to the last moment for the purpose of taking the House by surprise, and so rushing it through. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- You only meant the reference to be a political one ? Mr. SEDDON .- That is all. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Not that I intended a personal reflection on the Minister ? Mr. SEDDON .- That is so. It is true we had some information before I prepared that reference in the Financial Statement, but they wanted 35s. a share ; I indicated that the Go- vernment would not offer more than 30s., and then they intimated that they would take 32s. 6d. I wanted to show that we had not deliberately kept it back, but there was no use in attempt- ing to deal with it when we were not prepared to purchase at the price mentioned by the directors. Mr. Seddon the word ' now ' be retained." AYES, 38. Allen, E. G. Hall-Jones Mills Palmer Arnold Hogg Atkinson Hornsby Parata Rhodes Buddo Houston Seddon Carroll Hutcheson Collins Kaihau Steward Lang Colvin Tanner Laurenson Duncan Thompson, R. Ell Ward Lawry Witheford. Fowlds Lethbridge McGowan Fraser, W. Tellers. Mckenzie, R. Gilfedder Barclay Meredith Fraser, A. L. D. Hall NOES, 7. Tellers. Herries Russell, G. W. Allen, J. Millar Russell, W. R. Monk Massey. Majority for, 31. Amendment negatived, and Bill read a second time. ## IN COMMITTEE. Clause 2. - " The Governor is hereby em- powered, in the name and on behalf of His Majesty, to enter into an agreement with the Wellington and Manawatu Railway Company (Limited), (hereinafter called ' the company '). for the purchase of the railway and other assets of the company mentioned in the Schedule hereto (hereinafter referred to as 'the said railway ') as a going concern, subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter mentioned." Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved to add, after the words " His Majesty," the words " not later than the first day of May, one thousand nine hundred and two." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Bill reported, and read a third time. PUBLIC WORKS BILL. A message was received from His Exceliency the Governor, transmitting the draft of a Bill to amend the Public Works Act, and recom- mending the House to make provision accord- ingly. The message was referred to the Committee of the Whole, and the resolution was agreed to, reported to the House and agreed to, and the Bill read a first time. Mr. HALL -JONES (Minister for Public Works) moved the second reading of the Bili. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said he would like to point out to the House that this Bill did not afford any real relief at al. It merely shifted the disability from the ini- vidual to the local governing body. He was Is anxious to see relief given in these cases de anybody, but this Bill did not do so. Mr. W. FRASER (Wakatipu) said the offee- tion to the present law was that it would cause houses in the streets to have the appearance of the teeth of a saw-there would be no uus formity in the frontage of the houses. Thx clause would not alter that one bit. The indi. vidual who was compelled to go back would be compensated by the local body, but the aspect 
<page>1239</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1279</url>
rather see a 40 ft. street than a street partly 40 ft. wide and partly 60 ft. wide. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) regretted that this Bill did not seem to meet the diffi- culty. The trouble was this: The clause in the original Act said that directly a man sub- divided he must dedicate the necessary amount of land to widen the street where it was not already the regulation width. The clause in this Bill said that directly the dedication, which was compulsory, took place there was to be a claim for compensation against the local body. Thus, all over the town or borough there would be scattered odd patches of vacant land, where there was no possible chance of the street being widened, which were of no use to the city or borough, and which nevertheless would have to be paid for from the Corporation funds. Mr. FIELD (Otaki) said the Bill afforded no real relief. From the point of view of the man who lost the land some little good might be done, but from the point of view of the local body there was no good done at all. Mr. TANNER (Avon) said the House should be aware that this method for street-widening must be followed for a series of years before it could be completed. It was not possible to undo the mismanagement of the past in a day, .or in a single Act of Parliament. As years went on properties were destroyed by fires and in other ways, and the civic authorities should take advantage of every such occurrence to set back the frontage, and in the end that process  would be successful. He thought it was ad- visable to make the price paid by the local body for the portion of the land taken pro- portionate in some degree to the total valuation #cc-zero of the section. Mr. FOWLDS (Auckland City) said the re- marks made by the previous speaker in re- gard to the time required to carry out the widening of the streets would apply if on each sale and transfer a portion was cut off for the widening of the street. That, however, was not so, and in the present state of affairs the millennium might arrive without the streets being widened. Under the Minister's pro- posal the City or Borough Council would be let in for the payment of heavy compensa. tion claims for something that would be of no use to them till the end of time. It would be better to have nothing at all than to pass this proposal. Mr. HALL-JONES (Minister for Public Works) said, if this Bill did not meet the views .of honourable members they should throw it out on the second reading. The House divided. AYES, 32. Allen, E. G. Colvin Houston Allen, J. Hutcheson Ell Field Lawry Arnold Fisher Lethbridge Atkinson Hall-Jones McGowan Barclay Mckenzie, R. Herries Carrol! Meredith Hornsby Collins Monk Tellers. Symes Rhodes Hall Tanner Russell, W. R. Thompson, R. Palmer. NOES, 6. Tellers. Millar Heke Fowlds Hogg Parata. Laurenson. Majority for, 26. Bill read a second time. IN COMMITTEE. Section 2 .- " In any case where under section twenty-one of ' The Public Works Acts Amend- ment Act, 1900,' the owner of land is required to dedicate land for the purpose of widening a street, he shall be entitled to compensation from the local authority, to be assessed under the provisions of 'The Public Works Act, 1894.' " Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) moved to add the following proviso :- "Provided that section twenty-one of the said Act shall not apply to subdivisions front- ing on existing streets." The Committee divided on the question, "That the proviso be added." AYES, 22. Allen, J. Parata Hogg Hornsby Rhodes Atkinson Russell, W. R. Barclay Lang Witheford. Collins Lawry Field Massey Fisher Millar Tellers. Fowlds Monk Hall Palmer Hutcheson. Herries NOES, 18. Tanner Allen, E. G. Houston Buddo Laurenson Thompson, R. McGowan Ward. Carroll Meredith Tellers. Duncan Mills Arnold Ell Fraser, A. L. D. Seddon Symes. Hall-Jones Majority for, 4. Proviso added. Bill reported. On the question, That this Bill be read a third time, Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) wished to put on record his protest against the Bill. He be- lieved, in doing what they had done, they had made an alteration which was one of the most retrograde steps they could possibly have taken. He believed every man in the House would yet live to regret what they had done. They had undone one of the best clauses in the Public Works Act of last year, and had given the right to any man who desired to do so to continue the narrow slums and streets which were a dis- grace to so many towns. At the request of the honourable member who represented Welling. ton City-a town which in respect to narrow streets was the worst in the colony-they had passed this amendment. He could only ex- press his regret that the Committee had taken so foolish an action. He could not allow the 
<page>1240</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1280</url>
for a division even though he were the only one to vote against the present Bill. The House divided on the question, "That the Bill be read a third time." AYES, 23. Monk Fraser, W. Allen, J. Palmer Arnold Hall Rhodes Herries Atkinson Russell, G. W. Hornsby Barclay Russell, W. R. Hutcheson Collins Tellers. Fisher Lang Lethbridge Colvin Fowlds Field. Fraser, A. L. D. Massey NOES, 20. Tanner Allen, E. G. McGowan Thompson, R. Mckenzie, R. Carroll Meredith Ward Duncan Millar Witheford. Ell Mills Tellers. Heke Buddo Hogg Seddon Laurenson. Symes Lawry Majority for, 3. Bill read a third time. FLAX GRADING AND EXPORT BILL. A message was received from His Excellency the Governor transmitting a draft of this Bill, and recommending the House to make provision accordingly. The message was referred to the Committee of the Whole, and the resolution was agreed to, reported to the House and agreed to, and the  Bill read a first, a second, and a third time. VICTORIA COLLEGE SITE BILL. IN COMMITTEE. Amendments before the Committee in clause 2 withdrawn. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved that the following clause be substituted for clause 2 :- "(1.) The Mayor, Councillors, and Citizens of the City of Wellington are hereby empowered to convey or transfer to the corporation of the Victoria College the land described in the First Schedule hereto in exchange for such part of the Wellington College Site Reserve, or of any other lands within the City of Wellington vested in the Governors of the Wellington Col- lege and Girls' High School, as may be agreed upon between the said Governors and the Mayor, Councillors, and Citizens of the City of Wellington as of equal value to the land firstly before mentioned. " (2.) The said Governors are hereby em- powered to convey or transfer any part of the said reserve, or of any other lands vested in them, to the Mayor, Councillors, and Citizens of the City of Wellington." Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended agreed to. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) moved the following new clause :- "Any land conveyed or transferred to the corporation of the Victoria College under this Act shall be held by the said corporation upon Mr. Laurenson buildings and as grounds appertaining thereto. and upon condition that the said buildings shall be commenced within two years, and completed within five years, from the passing of this Act, and that the said land shall be inalienable by sale, mortgage, lease, or other- wise: Provided that, upon breach of any of the said trusts or conditions, the said land shal revert to and be revested in the Mayor, Coun- cillors, and Citizens of the City of Wellington as a public reserve, and that any land which may have been conveyed or transferred to the Mayor, Councillors, and citizens of the City of We- lington by the Governors of the Wellington College and Girls' High School under this Act shall thereupon revert to and be revested in the said Governors." Clause read a second time. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved to omit the words " and completed within five years," and to omit the proviso to the clause. Amendment agreed to, and clause as amended added to the Bill. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved the addition of the following new clause :- " Section eighteen of 'The Wellington Col- lege and Girls' High School Act, 1887,' is hereby amended by inserting, after the words ' the said buildings or either of them.' the words 'or such other buildings as may from time to time be deemed necessary."" New clause added. Bill reported, and read a third time. DUNEDIN CITY AND SUBURBAN TRAMWAYS BILL. Clause 5 .- Corporation deemed promoters cf tramways. On the motion of Mr. MILLAR (Dunedir City), the following proviso was added to the clause :- " Provided that no such power, right. of privilege shall be deemed to permit the Cor- poration to construct any tramway through that part of the Town Belt of Dunedin known as the Botanical Gardens, and being all that land on the east side of the Main North Road. and between the aforesaid road and the Op ho Road." On the motion of Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City), clauses 6 to 13, 17, and 19, and the First Schedule, were struck out, and the following new clause was added :- " All such further sums as may be required for the purposes of the said Act or this Act. of any of them, may be borrowed under the pre- visions of 'The Municipal Corporations Ac :. 1900.'" On the motion of Mr. MILLAR (Dune hin City), the preamble was amended accordingly. Bill reported, and read a third time. NORTH OF AUCKLAND RAILWAY. On the motion, That the House go into Cem- mittee of Supply, Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) moved. That the estimates be taken back, with s direction that the Government should mate 
<page>1241</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1281</url>
He Railway during the present session. abled to take such steps as would be necessary learned with surprise and indignation that before the scheme could be carried out. The city would require to obtain the best expert evidence, there was no amount on the supplementary estimates for the North of Auckland Railway. and unless they knew that they would obtain the When the House considered the thousands of power to carry out the scheme they could not go names attached to the petitions which had to the expense of getting the best expert advice been presented to Parliament in favour of a money could command. As things were now, vigorous prosecution of this line, he thought twelve months would have to elapse before the it showed clearly that those petitions had not city would be warranted even in going so far influenced the Government to the extent of as to getting that expert evidence. It was a the expenditure of a single pound. He hoped matter which concerned an important and large the Auckland phalanx would gather round in city, and the commercial prosperity of a city a strong body and force the Government to which promised to become the manufacturing do something. That was why he moved his centre of the colony. He would undertake to amendment. He was quite sure he would say that if this scheme were a feasible one, and have the support of the other Auckland City were given effect to, it would mean greatly en- members. When the House considered that hanced prosperity and an immense impetus to the North Island was five hundred miles short the manufacturing capabilities of Christchurch of the length of railways which had been made and the surrounding districts, and would be a in the South Island, he was certain that in a great advantage not only to the city, but to small matter like this the House would sympa- Canterbury and the whole colony as well. thize with him in the course he was taking. Mr. FOWLDS (Auckland City) seconded the church people had taken a deep interest in the proposal contained in the Bill in question for amendment. Mr. PALMER (Ohinemuri) said he would some considerable time. That city had no support the motion which had been moved by high-pressure water-supply, and it was to give the member for Auckland City (Mr. Withe- that that the Bill was required, and also to give ford). power to be used for electric lighting, power Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) had no to be used in manufactures, and as a means of desire to delay the House, but wished to call driving the trams, for which the city were in attention to a matter of importance which he negotiation to purchase. There were a number of small towns between Christchurch and the thought ought to have been dealt with-namely, the question of dealing with local Bills. A few place of supply, and those towns wanted the days ago provision had been made by the Pre- use of the electricity also. It would be seen,  mier for dealing with the unopposed local Bills, therefore, that the question was one which did and under that arrangement a number of Bills not affect Christchurch only, but extended far which had been nearly at the top of the Order into the country. A distinct promise had been given earlier in the session that this Bill would Paper were relegated to an inferior position at have an opportunity of being dealt with, and the bottom of the Paper. Amongst those Bills was one which was under his charge, to the ex- he believed a large number of members of the treme importance of which he wished to direct House were anxious that the Bill should be attention. It was a Bill to give the City of passed into law. Christchurch power to construct works for the establishment of an electric-power scheme to be against the action of two Auckland City mem- obtained from the waters of the Waimakariri, bers in bringing in this amendment in such a frivolous way as representing the wants of to be utilised in the city and its surroundings the district north of Auckland. That was not for electric power, lighting, and other pur- the way to assist the North of Auckland. Those It was impossible to overestimate poses. the immense advantages which this scheme honourable members had been presenting would give to the City of Christchurch. And numerous petitions this session from people it would not only be of immense advantage in the North of Auckland, and the settlers to Christchurch itself, but to the colony as a looked upon these honourable gentlemen as whole, since it would be an object-lesson and their friends, and he regretted that the wants illustration of what might be done in that of that district should be brought up in the direction. He understood that the Bill would manner in which they had been brought up have been opposed by those who had interests by Mr. Witheford and Mr. Fowlds. If those connected with the Selwyn County Council and honourable gentlemen could not do something the Waimakariri-Ashley Water-supply Board, better to assist the North of Auckland, he, as and he thought Parliament ought to have been a member representing that part of the colony, permitted to decide whether those bodies were would be much obliged to them if they never mentioned that district in the House at all. entitled to monopolize the waters of the river. He protested against the wants of that dis- He thought that a Bill of that importance ought to have had the opportunity of going be- trict being ridiculed by any member of this fore Parliament and being considered on its House. He did not ask for any different treat- merits ment than should be accorded to any ordinary know whether the honourable gentleman re- ferred to him or not, but he did not think he member, nor did he take it as a personal matter. What the city asked was to be empowered not had said anything in a frivolous manner. Mr. ELL (Christchurch Cityi said the Christ- Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) protested Mr. PALMER (Ohinemuri) said he did not 
<page>1242</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1282</url>
North of Auckland, and if that was the way they were to be thanked for helping the North of Auckland he would be inclined to let the North of Auckland help itself. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) said the motion he had moved was moved in a perfectly bona fide manner, and he was quite in earnest over it. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) said he was not going to find fault with any honourable mem- bers, but with the Cabinet. He thought the Ministers had reason to feel regret, and even to blush, for the manner in which they had treated the North of Auckland district. There was only too much truth in what honourable gentlemen had said in complaining of the amount allo- cated to the North, and to the expenditure upon a railway that had been pressed upon the attention of the Government year after year, and for which many definite promises had been made. He felt ashamed of the iniquities on these estimates. There was a large amount of money which could only be called wasted, whilst there was such a very small amount awarded for roads. The Premier had asserted in the House that no one had more consideration for farmers than himself ; but that was not his (Mr. Monk's) feeling, but rather that the farmers were ignored, because in this House there were too few of them to be considered, which was a strong argument in favour of their combining for the protection and recognition of their claim to an equitable share of the public money. He had no doubt the Premier spent money  where there was the most pressure. The amount that had been spent over the visit of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall might well make their visit to be remembered by the country people with regret rather than thank- fulness, when they were made to suffer all kinds of inconvenience, and to contribute large sums of money upon this and the other items for mere show and fites to be found throughout the estimates. Much as members and the people generally sympathized with Royalty and the people of Australia in connection with the in- auguration of the Commonwealth. they felt that more economy and care should have been exer- cised. It was impossible to defend the manner in which this expenditure had been conducted during the last six months. It was not well for us to be extravagant at the cost of works that the people must have or else suffer in conse- quence. If the prosperity of New Zealand was to be achieved at all, the community would have to slave for long hours with low prices, and compete with the energy of the world in selling their products. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) must express his regret at the manner in which the moneys for the Public Works Fund had been allocated. The Minister for Public Works in his Statement said that after bringing down his public works estimates he had a sum of $300,000 odd not then allocated ; also, there was an extra quarter of a million voted for the Public Works Fund, and yet they found an allocation of only $178,000. Why should not the unallocated Mr. Palmer placed on the supplementary estimates ? Even that was not allocated. He must call attention also to the wretched amount put down to roads and bridges. Out of the €178,000 allocated to Public Works Fund only $38,000 was for roads. He must say the Minister for Public Works Was treating the back-block settlers and the roadless people with a hard-heartedness which he (Mr. Herries) had not thought he was capable of. Mr. LANG (Waikato) said the amount placed on the supplementary estimates for roads in his own particular district was very small inderd. especially when many applications hall teac made for important works. The only distru: that had come off well in this respect was Westland. Westland altogether received abos; as many thousands as other districts did hun- dreds. Mr. HALL -JONES (Minister for Paldie Works) wished to reply to the statements wheni the smallness of the vote for the railway norte of Auckland. He had received the following letter during the session from a gentleman in that district :- "Komokoriki, 5th July, 1901. "DEAR SIR, -While the settlers here nete with pleasure the business-like manner work s progressing on the Komokoriki Section. vet the committee would respectfully draw your atten. tion to the imperative need of pushing on the permanent survey. "It is alike to the best interests of the rai. way and to the settlers that it should be price- cuted without delay, so that the work can go on uninterrupted. " The committee hope that the continuity of policy that has obtained latterly shall be main- tained .- I am, &c .. "ALFRED WOODCOCK, Jun., "Chairman, Ahuroa Railway Committee. "The Hon. the Minister for Public Works." This showed the settlers had confidence in the Government, and the result would show that their confidence was not misplaced. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) asked why the Minister did not reconcile that with the wes on the estimates. To-day he had received a telegram from the very gentleman the Minister mentioned-Mr. Woodcock-protesting acs LX the smallness of the grant for the North of Auckland Railway. Mr. HOGG (Masterton) said. In his opa.a. the Minister for Public Works had done } best to distribute the money at his dispo it it such a way as to give a reasonable amount of satisfaction to members who are prepared :: accept a fair arrangement. He was sorry iic so much money was being expanded in ton! ! to put New Zealand on a war footing, an : Lt hoped such expenditure as had lately takt: place in this direction would not take place again for many years to come. If half or :w- thirds of this money had been devoted t. r.i: and bridges, the effect on the colony wouldl hat been most salutary. 
<page>1243</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1283</url>
the words proposed to be omitted stand part of could assure the House that never since he had been Colonial Treasurer had the amount remain- the question." ing on the 31st March been so small as it was AYES, 26. at present. He intended to look ahead. They Parata Allen, J. Fraser, W. had to go ahead from the 31st March until Hall-Jones Rhodes Arnold further supply was granted, and after the 31st Russell, G. W. Atkinson Hogg March there would have to be a cutting-down Buddo Hornsby Steward of expenditure, or he would be twitted, as he Carroll Hutcheson Symes bad been this session, with having liabilities Ward. Collins Laurenson over and above his ways and means. Conse- Tellers. Ell McGowan quently, he feared the margin must be left, and Meredith Field Colvin in the face of an expenditure of two millions, Mills Tanner. Flatman which was the amount on the estimates, a margin of £380,000 was not too large ; in fact, the mar- NOES, 12. gin ought to be more. He considered, however, Lethbridge Thompson, R. Fowlds that £1,250,000 was sufficient loan-money for one Massey Tellers. Heke year, and the colony would have to do the best Mckenzie, R. Herries Palmer they could with it. Members should realise Witheford. Monk Lang that the country could not go on keeping up Lawry the public debt and borrow more than a million Majority for, 14. a year. The pressure on his funds by members Amendment negatived. had been very great ; but he recognised that Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said he had a few they must keep within reasonable limits, and words to say. Regarding the railways north of the amount asked by way of loan for this year Auckland-the subject-matter of the specific -¥1,250,000-was a liberal amount by which to increase the indebtedness of the colony. He amendment, so far as the Government was con- cerned-it was recognised that there was great had a few words to say about the provision in necessity both for roads and railways there. the way of roads for the farmers. He could That portion of the country had not received only say this : that he believed the better roads you had and the more roads you made you im- the same attention as other parts of the colony. In this remark he alluded to years gone by, to proved the condition of the country, and gave the days of large loans, when the public works greater opportunities to producers to get their policy was inauguated. He remembered a produce to market, and thus relieve many who at present laboured under serious disad- statement being made showing the relative expenditure and what had been contributed, vantages. taking the population basis, and there was a and in some districts where there was very little very large sum due to that part of the colony. gravel for the roads, any one who travelled In respect to the North of Auckland Railway, he through the country realised the disadvantages wanted to say there would be a full expenditure under which these people laboured. At all upon the work of the money voted for it, and events, he took it that if you took the votes for there was nothing to prevent the Minister for roads this year, as compared with years Public Works, when he under spent one year. gone by, the comparison would be favourable to the votes for this year. Then, they had been making liberal expenditure next year. Mr. MASSEY .- You intend doing that ? told that the Royal visit had a good deal to. Mr. SEDDON hoped his colleague would do with the stopping of moneys in connection bear this in mind. He wished to remove with roads. He (Mr. Seddon) said that had no another misapprehension. Members looked effect whatever on the expenditure on roads. over the estimates, and if they did not find The Government had taken from the consoli- certain items there they at once put it down dated revenue $500,000, and transferred it to that he, as Colonial Treasurer, had struck out the Public Works Fund. He thought. in a the item. Well, he would like to say he gave little country like New Zealand, that 15s. per the Minister of Lands $30,000 to divide as he head of population, as they had already, pleased. How was it possible for the Colonial for the construction of public works was a Treasurer to know how that money had been very fair amount indeed. With respect to divided ? All the Colonial Treasurer had to do the question raised by the member for was to find the money. Christchurch City (Mr. Collins), he admitted An Hon. MEMBER .- Why not give him that there was room for complaint. There was no doubt, to his mind, that the Wai- £100,000. Mr. SEDDON said he could not do it. In makariri River should be and would be utilised the Public Works Fund he had a margin of for the generation of power. The difficulty had $380,000 to carry him on after the 31st March been in the adjustment as between other bodies next and till the November following. A sum who had rights in respect to that river. With of $100,000 had gone to additions to open lines, respect to the City of Christchurch Electric and $50,000 to roads, out of the $250,000 Power and Loan Empowering Bill. the Govern- additional authorised to be raised. ment could not be blamed. The Government Mr. W. FRASER. - We have not got it. It would have been quite prepared, were it possible, is not on the estimates. to have allowed further time for the considera- Mr. SEDDON said, Yes, they had got $150 of tion of the Bill in question. Once the estimates And in these newly settled districts, 
<page>1244</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1284</url>
were through, if those concerned came to some agreement he would be prepared to put the Bill through. His colleague, the Minister for Public Works, had had his difficulties in connection with the estimates, and so had the Minister for Lands, and if there had been more money he supposed there would have been greater satis- faction. Motion agreed to, and the House went into Committee of Supply. ## SUPPLY. IN COMMITTEE. SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES. CLASS I .- LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT. Vote, Legislative Council, 28, agreed to. Vote, House of Representatives, $315, agreed to. Vote, General Expenses, £2,000, agreed to. CLASS II .- COLONIAL SECRETARY'S DEPART- MENT. Electoral Department, £750. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) wanted to know when the Representation Commission was going to be set up. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said it would be done next vear. Mr. R. MCKENZIE (Motucka) asked whether the electoral rolls had been revised since the last election. Sir J. G. WARD (Colonial Secretary) said the ordinary law had been carried out regarding the matter. Vote, $750, agreed to. Vote, Printing and Stationery Department,  £6,250, agreed to. Vote, Public Health Department, £462, agreed to. Vote, Office of Industries and Commerce, €5,010, agreed to. Vote, Tourist and Health Resorts Depart- ment. £6,457, agreed to. Miscellaneous services, £32,722. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) would like some ex- planation of the items, "Entertainment of Admiral and officers of United States warship ' Brooklyn,' $105 " ; of the item, "Further sum required to meet expenses connected with the Royal visit, $20,000"; also, " Grant to Right Hon. the Premier for expenses connected with the representation of the colony at the coronation of His Majesty Edward VII., £1,500." Mr. R. MCKENZIE (Motucka) moved, That the item, "Entertainment of Admiral and officers of United States warship ' Brooklyn,' $105," be struck out. He did not see why this should be charged to the State. Sir J. G. WARD said the " Brooklyn," which had been visiting Australia in connection with the Commonwealth inauguration, had been invited to come on to New Zealand, and as a matter of courtesy to New Zealand she had done so. It was not, therefore, a private matter, and it was only fitting that the Ad- miral and officers should be entertained at a public dinner. Mr. Seddon Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) moved that the item, " Federation Commission : \- Additional allowance whilst in Australia to Commissioners who were members of the General Assembly, anything contained in ' The Disqualification Act, 1878,' or . The Public Revenues Act, 1892,' to the contrary notwithstanding (extra allowance, (442," be struck out : First, because it was in detiance of the Disqualification Act ; and, secondly, . because he did not want a precedent set up. and honourable members would understand that this was a new order of things. He did not raise the question as to what should be paid to Royal Commissioners, but he though: that whatever was done should be done by an amendment of the Disqualification Act, which the Premier had promised to bring down earlier in the session. Mr. SEDDON said this only provided for the payment of these Commissioners during the days they were in Australia. If the House expected these members to go to Australia and represent this colony in this important position, and mix with the leading men in the Common- wealth, and live there on £1 a day, it was expected what was impossible to do. It was unreasonable, to his mind, to ask these memi.ers to be out of pocket while acting in the service of the colony. This course had been followed with the Royal Commissioners who went to Australia before. He knew the House voted $300 to the Commissioner on the Public Trest Commission ; he knew another case where the House voted £220; and several other cases of a like nature. He was of opinion that the Disqualification Act required amendment in this respect. Mr. HOGG (Masterton) knew something about the other colonies, and thought that the travelling-expenses in New Zealand were quite as great as in Australia. He would not object to the vote if the Government showed s disposition to treat the other Roval Commis- sioners in the same way. But the fact was that the money could not be legally paid. He did not think the Government was justified in making a special allowance for this Commis sion, especially when they were not in a ps- tion to alter the allowances to Commissione? all round. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) said there was a great difference in the matter of ex- pense between travelling in Australia and New Zealand, and that seemed to him to be in es. tremely good reason why something additional should be granted to the members of this Con- mission. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) did not arprore of this vote being on the estimates, and beli vote to strike it out. Any one who went on a Commission knew what pay he would revive when he was appointed, and none of the (.CI- missioners seemed to have raised their vous against their appointments. If they were di- satisfied they should have objected in the tr: instance. He admitted that it did not pay one to go on a Royal Commission, for. afte! paying hotel bills out of the allowance, they 
<page>1245</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1285</url>
did not receive the wages of an ordinary labourer. Although the amount granted was not sufficient, this was not the proper manner to increase the allowance, and the proposal was practically an evasion of the law. Mr. A. L. D. FRASER (Napier) intended to vote for this amendment if only as a protest against the Government for not having kept the promise to bring down an amendment of the Disqualification Act. He considered the payment of so small an amount was unjust. Mr. TANNER (Avon) said it was 4.0. clear that at the time the Disqualifi- cation Act was passed it was not intended, as far as the matter of pay was concerned, to put members of the House on the same footing on Commissions as experts who were called in to assist in their inquiries. He would be sorry, however, to see the Act amended by the House as it was at present constituted, and in its pre- sent temper ; he thought it would be very much to the disadvantage of the country. If any member of the House was invited to serve on a Commission, he knew before he accepted the position exactly what the remuneration would be, and could decide accordingly. He (Mr. Tanner) would vote for the resolution proposed by the honourable member for Riccarton, but without any prejudice on the question, and without sympathy with the feeling, which ap- peared to be rapidly spreading, that because a particular class of people received €3 3s. a day for their services on a Commission members of the House ought to be paid more than was at present allowed them by the law.  Sir J. G. WARD (Colonial Secretary) said he thought it was only right and fair to some of the members of the Federation Commis- sion that he should state to the House what the conditions wore upon which they agreed to take seats on the Commission. It was only fair to say that two of those gentlemen -- Colonel Pitt and Mr. Millar-at first re- fused to go on the Commission. The Govern- ment were desirous, however, of securing their services, and, after considering the matter, it appeared to him (Mr. Ward) that it would be unfair to those gentlemen to ask them to go with the Commission to Australia for $1 a day. He therefore informed them that, as other members of the Commission were receiving three guineas a day, the Government would undertake to ask the House to make their case a special one, and to authorise that a certain sum should be voted to them. In saying this to the House he did not desire to influence members in any way in their votes. The state- ment he had made was only due to the two gentlemen he had named, and, with the expla- nation he had given, he thought the House would ratify. the action the Government had taken. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) ad- mitted that the services of members of the Legislature were as likely to be quite as valu- able as the services of any other individual on a Commission. At the same time he contended that, as members of Parliament, they had a duty to the country extending beyond the session of VOL. CXIX .- 80. Parliament, and as members of the House they were expected to make sacrifices in certain directions when called upon to do so. If mem- bers, in the face of the Disqualification Act, and in spite of the service they owed to the country throughout the whole term of their membership. came to the House with an ad misericordiam appeal, as in the present instance, it was to his mind a sign that the Legislature was on the down grade. In face of what the Colonial Secretary had stated, it would be a most invidious task for members to strike out the vote, but, nevertheless, if he stood alone he would raise his voice against it. Mr. LAURENSON ( Lyttelton) said he could not approve of this vote. He thought their course was perfectly clear. The law said that any member of Parliament serving on a Com- mission was to get #1 a day, and he therefore trusted the House would strike out the vote and carry out the law. Mr. HOGG (Masterton) said the House was being asked to set the law entirely aside, and he contended that there was very little differ- ence in a man taking this money and a man who had put his hand in some one else's pocket. It was an illegal thing, and he hoped members would consult their dignity and respect the law of the land. Mr. R. MCKENZIE (Motueka) said he in- tended to vote against this item, because the Government had been remiss in their duties. They ought to have brought in a Bill to amend the Disqualification Act, and pass a clause to validate this payment. If this sort of thing went on it would be the duty of the House to go back to the old Public Revenues Act. He was satisfied that the members on this Commission must have been money out of pocket, but that statement would also apply to members of all other Commissions. He would withdraw his amendment, That the item " £105 " be struck out. The Committee divided. AYES, 14. Meredith Hornsby Atkinson Monk. Hutcheson Collins Tellers. Lang Flatman Hogg Fowlds Laurenson Russell, G. W. Herries Mckenzie, R. NOES, 23. Allen, E. G. Hall-Jones Symes Tanner Buddo Heke Thompson, R. Lawry Carroll Ward McGowan Colvin Witheford. Mills Duncan Tellers. Palmer Field Barclay Fisher Parata Fraser, A. L. D. Seddon Hall Majority against, 9. Amendment negatived, and item retained. Mr. BUDDO thought the sum of $32 for encouragement of swimming in schools was inadequate. Sir J. G. WARD said this was to cover a liability incurred last year, being the cost of a number of copies of hand-books and charts 
<page>1246</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1286</url>
issued by the Life Saving Society, of England, obtained through the Agent-General, and dis- tributed to schools. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) asked, in reference to the item "Grant to the widow of the late Sir John Mckenzie, Minister of Lands, $2,000," whether it was the intention of the Govern- ment to hand over the lump sum, or provide an annuity. Mr. SEDDON said the Government would have the matter carefully gone into, and the House might rest assured that they would do their best and give effect to the wishes of the majority of the House, who in this manner desired to pay a tribute to their late friend and comrade. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) thought the House should be afforded some particulars about the enormous sum of £20,000 in con- nection with the Royal visit. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) thought the expenses of the Royal visit had been covered by the amount on the general esti- mates. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) said it ap- peared that the expenses in connection with the Royal visit amounted to $90,000. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) wished to know something about the Premier's visit to the Coronation. He did not object to the amount set down, because it was far better that a reasonable sum should be named, and there should be no haggling afterwards, and he hoped there would be no future sum referring to the visit. Would the Premier say whether he was to be the sole representative of the colony at the Coronation, with the exception of the  Agent-General ? Mr. SEDDON said the Government had dis- cussed the matter, and they came to the con- clusion that the Premier might be invited to attend the Coronation, and that being so, they considered it their duty to make provision ac- cordingly. He had all along said that he would not again be placed in the position in which he was placed on the occasion of the Jubilee celebrations. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked if £1,500 would cover all the expenses in connection with the representation of the colony at the Corona. tion. Mr. SEDDON .- Yes, it would cover all his expenses. Mr. MASSEY asked the Premier to give some indication as to what course would be adopted in regard to the meeting of Parlia- ment next year. Were they to have a short session ? Mr. SEDDON said they would, so far as he saw, follow the usual course, and take the session at the usual time. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City) said the £1,500 that appeared on the estimates was too much. It was not so much by $250 as was voted on the occasion of the Jubilee visit ; but at the same time it was $500 more than any of the Australian Premiers spent on the same occasion, and €1,000 more than was spent by the Premier of Tasmania. Our Premier's ex- offer. But for the Premier there would pre- Sir J. G. Ward | penditure during his stay in England at the Jubilee amounted to some $20 a day, although champagne and all the other necessaries of life were found for him by the Imperial Govern- ment at the Hotel Cecil. He failed to see that there would be any more exacting or expensive requirements on this occasion, and he would move, That the item be reduced by £500. He greatly regretted that, amid all our professions of democracy and Liberalism, there was so little regard for democratic simplicity and frugality- that extravagance itself seemed to be regarded as a patriotic virtue when the country had to foot the Bill. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) said this was one of those occasions on which honour. able members should drop the quasi-personal tone. All understood that the Premiers of the Empire would go to London to the coronation of the King, and he hoped honourable members would see that the New Zealand Premier went Home in the proper way, and that there would be no haggling or miserable huckstering by members of the House when the right honour- able gentleman came back, as was the case at the time of the Record Reign celebrations. He hoped the honourable member would with- draw his amendment. If the Cabinet had any intention of extending the representation of the colony beyond the visit of the Premier, be hoped that that would be dealt with now, if possible, so that proper provision could be made, and so avoid any unpleasant remarks about the increased expenditure next session. Mr. HALL - JONES (Minister for Public Works) wished to state, in reference to the Pre- mier's last visit Home, that at his (Mr. Hall- Jones's) request the Premier made inquiries as to the best and most economical way of obtain- ing the supplies of paper and stationery for the Government Printing Office. As honourable members were aware, a very large quantity was used every year, and the improved arrangements effected a saving of £1,000 per annum, or a total of £3,000 to date. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the reason why he did feel sore, when the expenses of his visit Home were being discussed by the House. was that, by one financial transaction alone be saved this colony £10,000. In view, therefore, of what took place on the floor of the House on his return they could understand what his feel. ings were. The small matter just mentioned by his colleague and by which £1,000 a year bad been saved for four years was outside this etber business which he had just referred to. If any representation was asked for, outside of what was contemplated to be covered by this vote. then the Government would have to consider it. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said. In the event of the Governor receiving a me- sage from the Secretary of State for the Colonies, expressing the desire of the Kies to see a contingent of our Native warriors or Volunteers, what would happen would proiuk's be that honourable members would get tele- grams asking if they were favourable. In that case he would himself have no opinion to 
<page>1247</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1287</url>
cost to the colony would certainly not be £1,500. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) would like to see arrangements made by which the Native Minister also could go Home, as he thought the Native race should be represented at the Coronation. He hoped when the Premier did go Home he would come back as good a radical as he was now. Mr. R. MCKENZIE (Motueka) had no ob- jection whatever to the amount of the vote for the Premier's visit Home; in fact, he believed for the occasion it was inadequate. The Committee divided on the question, "That the item, Premier's expenses at the King's coronation, £1,500, be reduced by £500." AYES, 4. Tellers. Herries Atkinson Monk. Hutcheson, J. NOES, 28. Millar Allen, E. G. Hall Mills Hall-Jones Barclay Parata Heke Carroll Colvin Symes Hogg Ward Duncan Laurenson Witheford. Lawry Ell Lethbridge Field Tellers. Fraser, A. L. D. McGowan Mckenzie, R. Hornsby Fraser, W. Meredith Palmer. Guinness Majority against, 24.  Amendment negatived. Vote, £32,722, agreed to. CLASS III. - COLONIAL TREASURER'S DEPART-   MENT. Vote, Treasury Department, £10, agreed to. Land- and Income-tax Department, $150. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) wished to know the status of the persons compensated for loss of office by these votes. Mr. MILLS (Minister for Trade and Cus- toms) said one had been four years in the service, and the other two years, and both had been compulsorily retired. Vote, £150, agreed to. Vote, Miscellaneous services, £3,144, agreed to. CLASS IV .- JUSTICE DEPARTMENT. Vote, Department of Justice, £25, agreed to. Vote, Crown Law Office, #25, agreed to. Vote, District and Magistrates' Courts, £185, agreed to. Vote, Native Land Court, £45, agreed to. Maori Lands Administration Department, £1,685. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City) thought the sum of $500 for the election of Councils and $500 for contingencies was a very large sum to be spent on the administration of the Act passed last session. He would like an ex- planation of how the contingencies were made up. He noticed that in the next vote there was included another $500 in aid of the cost of administration of Maori Councils. The total Acts was £3,000, which seemed to be an enor- mous sum for the working of two Acts, of one of which the best to be hoped was that it would remain a dead letter. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) said the operations of the Councils extended over the whole of New Zealand, and therefore it seemed to him this was a very moderate amount, considering the interests involved. Vote, $1,685, agreed to. Vote, Maori Councils, £1,234, agreed to. Vote, Miscellaneous services, £1,790, agreed to. CLASS V. - POST AND TELEGRAPH DEPART- MENT. Vote, Postal and Telegraph salaries, £1,095, agreed to. Vote, Ocean mail-services, £6,951, agreed to. Vote, Carriage of mails by railway, £750, agreed to. Miscellaneous services, £1,335. Mr. R. MCKENZIE wished to call the atten- tion of the Minister to the frequency of frauds in connection with the Post-Office Savings- Bank and Money-order offices in the colony. He thought some better system should be adopted for the prevention of such fraud. In sending money by wire, when the moneys were handed over the counter there was no receipt or acknowledgment of any kind given, nor was there a suitable system of checking. He thought this was offering a premium for fraud, and placing unnecessary temptation before young officers. Sir J. G. WARD (Postmaster-General) said the whole system of sending telegrams through- out the colony was on the stamp system, which the public themselves could use and so prevent abuse. People who sent telegrams had a right to stamp them, and if they took that precaution no fraud could occur. He dissented entirely from the honourable member's reflection upon the officers of his department as unwarranted, and not in accordance with facts. Vote, £1,335, agreed to. CLASS VI .- CUSTOMS AND MARINE DEPART- MENTS. Vote, Customs Offices and services, £325, agreed to. Customs : Miscellaneous services, £1,165. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked for an ex- planation of the item, "Refund of Customs duty on hat-making machinery, £421." Mr. MILLS (Minister of Customs) said this was a refund on part of certain machinery im- ported for the purpose of starting a new in- dustry. This was following the usual course. Vote, £1,165, agreed to. Marine and Harbours, $595. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) asked who was the new officer, Secretary of Marine, $450 per annum ? Mr. HALL-JONES said the vote was three months' salary for an officer to be Secretary of Marine. No appointment had yet been made. 
<page>1248</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1288</url>
the Minister thought the salaries of Inspectors of Machinery were sufficient. Mr. HALL-JONES said that this year they had been gradually increasing some of the lower salaries, and would continue to do so until they reached what was a fair salary. Vote, 4595, agreed to. Vote, Government steamers, £950, agreed to. Marine, miscellaneous services, 9956. Mr. MASSEY wished to know where the wharf in Manukau Harbour, $100, was to be. Mr. HALL-JONES said it was the Awhitu Wharf. Mr. FOWLDS (Auckland City) asked why the consolidated revenue had to bear the cost of a gratuity to some one in the employ- ment of the Westport Harbour Board. Mr. HALL-JONES said there was no power under the Westport Harbour Act to pay the money, and the department would pay it and deduct it from the money payable to the Har- bour Board. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) asked why $250, further compassionate allowance, was being granted to the widow of the late Captain Fairchild. Mr. HALL-JONES said Captain Fairchild was a very old officer, who received at one time a salary of $700. When he died he was receiv- ing $450, and his widow got a year and a half's salary. This sum was put on in view of repre- sentations made by several members. Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) said it seemed to him the widows of Civil servants in Wellington were treated differently from the widows of Civil servants in other parts of the colony. He thought the system should be uniform. He referred to the case of Mrs. Lanauze, in which case a compassionate allow- ance was recommended by the Committee, but had not been granted by the Minister. He considered that justice ought to be meted out all round, and to test the feeling of the Com- mittee on the matter he moved, That the item, " Further compassionate allowance to the widow of the late Captain Fairchild, £250," be struck out. Sir J. G. WARD said that Mrs. Fairchild's case was a most deserving one. The Govern- ment had so decided after full inquiry into it. Her husband lost his life in the service of the colony, and had been a most faithful, zealous, and valuable officer. He had no doubt, from the facts stated by the honourable mem- ber for Avon, the case he referred to-that of Mrs. Lanauze-was also a case that was worthy of consideration. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) thought it was about time the Government made more generous provision in the case of widows who were left in poor circumstances and with children depend- ing upon them. Mr. TANNER (Avon) said, in the case he had referred to, no claim could be entertained for service or anything of that kind, but a petition was presented to the House and was favourably recommended by the Committee. He under- stood the matter was brought under the notice compensation, but a fair case for a compas- sionate grant. No notice, however, had been taken of it. When the petition came before the Committee again this year it was favour- ably reported upon once more, and he under- stood a grant was actually placed on the estimates, but had been dropped in the period that elapsed between the compilation and the publication of the estimates. The case he was referring to was that of Mrs. Lanauze. Mr. MILLS (Commissioner of Customsi said the case of Mrs. Lanauze was one that would be looked into. The Cabinet would give full and fair consideration to any claim there might be. Amendment negatived, and vote, £956, agreed to. CLASS VII .-- STAMP AND DEEDS DEPARTMENT. Vote, Stamp Department, €212, agreed to. CLASS VIII .- EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. Vote, Education Department, Head Ofice. $50, agreed to. Vote, Public Schools, £337, agreed to. Vote, Industrial Schools, $15, agreed to. Vote, School for Deaf-mutes, $56, agreed to. School for Blind, $24. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) under- stood a sum would be placed on the supplemen- tary estimates for a fireproof building for the inmates of the Blind Institution in Auckland. That promise had not been fulfilled. Vote, $24, agreed to. Vote, Miscellaneous services, £3,145, agreed to. CLASS IX .- LUNACY AND CHARITABLE DEPART- MENT. Vote, Lunatic asylums, £50, agreed to. Vote, Charitable, £324, agreed to. CLASS X .- DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR. Voto, Department of Labour, €2,250, agreed to. CLASS XI .- MINES DEPARTMENT. Vote, Miscellaneous services, £4,750, agreed to. CLASS XII .- DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. Vote, Department of Agriculture, $533, agreed to. Vote, Miscellaneous services, £4,000, agroed to. CLASS XIII. - WORKING RAILWAYS DEPART- MENT. Vote, Working Railways, £33,352, agreed to. CLASS XIV .- PUBLIC AND SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND DOMAINS. Public buildings, $1,050. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) moved. Thx the item, "Fuel, light, water, &c., Guvern- ment Houses. $50," be struck out. Mr. HALL-JONES said this was an item that had always been charged against the colony, and had always been paid by the colony, and His Excellency the Governor was 
<page>1249</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1289</url>
decessor. In fact, it was part of the arrange- ment. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) pointed out that on the main estimates $350 had been passed for this very purpose. The Committee divided on the question, " That the item be struck out." AYES, 17. Hall Symes Atkinson Hutcheson Barclay Tanner Laurenson Thompson, R. Buddo Mckenzie, R. Collins Tellers. Meredith Hornsby Ell Russell, G. W. Millar Guinness NOES, 16. Rhodes Allen, E. G. Heke Carroll Ward. Kaibau Lawry Duncan Field McGowan Tellers. Fraser, A. L. D. Mills Colvin Palmer Hall-Jones Parata Majority for, 1. Item, £50, struck out. Vote as amended agreed to. CLASS XV .- DEFENCE DEPARTMENT. Vote, Defence Department, £180, agreed to. Vote, Stores and Magazines, £193, agreed to. Miscellaneous services, $4,054. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) asked for particulars about the steamer "Nile," which had been purchased recently in  6.0. Auckland. Mr. HALL-JONES said this vessel had been purchased in connection with the defence-works in Auckland. Hitherto they had been hiring a boat to carry stores, et cetera. The "Nile" had been reported on by the engineer-surveyor before being purchased, and it was considered a good purchase for the colony. Vote, £4,054, agreed to. CLASS XVI .- POLICE DEPARTMENT. Vote, Police Department, £270, agreed to. Miscellaneous services, £338. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) asked for an explanation of the circumstances under which $55 was set down as a further allow- ance to ex-Constable Patrick McGill. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) could not remember the circumstances now. This was a further allowance given for injuries re- ceived while in the service. Mr. SYMES (Egmont) said, In reference to the £183 set down as compensation to Daniel Hannan, ex-sergeant of police, this sergeant petitioned the House some few sessions ago, and the Committee had no recommendation to make. Mr. McGOWAN believed the petition was re- ferred to the Government. Mr. SYMES had a very distinct recollection of sitting on the Committee, and he thought there was no recommendation. Unless there Buddo was a better answer forthcoming he would move to strike this item out. the Government as a necessitous case. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City) said that the member for Riccarton had referred to ex- Constable Patrick McGill as having been some time out of the Force, but, if he was not mis- taken, the man had been out of the Force more than once. Colonel Hume submitted to the Police Commission a report from Sergeant McDonald to the effect that this man was drunk while on duty at a racecourse. He was accord- ingly dismissed by the Commissioner in Novem- ber, 1890. The Commissioner then had power to act on his own initiative ; but a new Minister. of Defence, Mr. Seddon, came into office in January, 1891, and one of the first of his ad- ministrative acts was to reinstate the drunken officer. Mr. McGOWAN said he was not able at the moment to give the information asked for. But, at any rate, this ex-Constable McGill was a very old officer, and it was under a strong recommendation that the sum had been placed on the estimates. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City) would move, That the item, " £55," be struck out. Mr. SYMES (Egmont) said, in reference to Daniel Hannan, ex-sergeant of police, for whom there was #183 put down as compensation for loss of office, that officer had several black marks recorded against him, and it had been proved that he was connected with some busi- ness that no police officer ought to have been mixed up in. If he was entitled to it at all, the amount should have been put on the estimates some years ago. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said this sum of £55 was put down as an allowance for Constable McGill as he did not get his full compensation on retirement. He had been many years in the service, and it was believed he ought to have got his full compensation, and this was the balance of the money due. As to Constable Hannan, that officer was not mixed up with anything at all. The transaction upon which he was called upon to resign was some busi- ness transaction, altogether unconnected with his duties as a police officer. There had been no black mark against him. Mr. SYMES moved to strike out the item, " Compensation for loss of office to Daniel Hannan. ex-sergeant of police, $183." Con- stable Hannan had already petitioned the House, and the Public Petitions Committee had reported against him. The Committee divided on the question, "That the item, ' Compensation to ex-Sergeant Daniel Hannan, £183,' be struck out." AYES, 11. Barclay Laurenson Tanner. Meredith Ell Tellers. Rhodes Hornsby Atkinson Russell, G. W. Symes. Hutcheson NOES, 18. Allen, E. G. Duncan Hall Fraser, A. L. D. Hall-Jones Colvin Guinness Heke 
<page>1250</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1290</url>
Tellers. Parata Kaihau Field Seddon Lawry Palmer. Ward. McGowan Mills Majority against, 7. Item retained. \`The Committee divided on the question, " That the item, ' Further allowance to ex-Con- stable Patrick McGill, $55,' be struck out." AYES 9. Rhodes Tellers. Barclay Atkinson Symes Ell Tanner. Hutcheson. Hornsby Meredith NOES, 18. Parata Heke Buddo Seddon Kaihau Carroll Ward. Lawry Colvin Tellers. McGowan Duncan Allen, E. G. Mills Field Fraser, A. L. D. Palmer Hall Hall-Jones Majority against, 9. Item retained, and vote, £338, agreed to. CLASS XVII .- DEPARTMENT OF LANDS AND SURVEY. Vote, Department of Lands and Survey, £235, agreed to. Vote, Miscellaneous services, £4,326, agreed to. CLASS XVIII .- VALUATION DEPARTMENT. Vote, Valuation expenses, £67, agreed to. GOVERNMENT LIFE INSURANCE DEPARTMENT.  Vote, Salaries, £25, agreed to. Vote, Government Accident Insurance De- partment, £390, agreed to. Vote, Contingencies, £4,000, agreed to. PUBLIC TRUST OFFICE. Vote, Public Trust Office, £55, agreed to. GOVERNMENT ADVANCES TO SETTLERS OFFICE. Vote, Government Advances to Settlers Office, £400, agreed to. PUBLIC WORKS FUND. CLASS XX .- PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENTAL. Vote, Public Works, Departmental, £2,885, agreed to. CLASS XXI .- RAILWAYS. Vote, Railways, £525, agreed to. Additions to open lines, $125,000. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) desired to call atten- tion to the unsafe and unsatisfactory condition of the Kaiapoi Railway-station, and he urged that more accommodation should be provided. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) said the Kaiapoi Railway-station and the arrangements for shunting were a menace to the lives of people travelling there, and it was surprising that accidents had not occurred. The station-build- ing was small and unsuitable. Sir J. G. WARD said he would be very glad to give consideration to the representations of the member for Kaiapoi and the member for Ashley ; but he could not promise anything definite at present. His action was necessarily governed by the moneys available for the de- partment. Vote, £125,000, agreed to. CLASS XXII .- PUBLIC BUILDINGS. Vote, Postal and Telegraph, £1,490, agreed to. School buildings, $6,000. Mr. BUDDO (Christchurch City) desired to know if the Cabinet had agreed to allow the Board at Christchurch to sell the site for a technical school, with a view of acquiring a more central site. Mr. HALL-JONES regretted to say that nothing yet had been done in connection with this matter, but he might say he quite agreed with the honourable member on the view be took on the subject. Vote, £6,000, agreed to. CLASS XXIII .- LIGHTHOUSES, HARBOUR- WORKS, ETC. Vote, Lighthouses, £500, agreed to. Vote, Harbour-works, £350, agreed to. CLASS XXIV .- TOURIST AND HEALTH RESORTS. Vote, Tourist and health resorts, £3.400, agreed to. CLASS XXVI .- CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, AND SUPERVISION OF ROADS, BRIDGES, AND OTHER PUBLIC WORKS. Vote, Roads, £37,643, agreed to. Vote, Roads on goldfields, £783, agreed to. UNAUTHORISED EXPENDITURE. CONSOLIDATED FUND. Vote, For services not provided for, £26,367 18s. 6d., agreed to. Vote, For services in excess of votes, £62,788 3s. 2d. PUBLIC WORKS FUND. Vote, For services not provided for. Er), agreed to. Vote, For services in excess of votes, £17,468 3s. 7d., agreed to. LAND FOR SETTLEMENTS ACCOUNT. Vote, For services in excess of votes. 5334 18s. 1d., agreed to. GOVERNMENT LIFE INSURANCE DEPARTMENT. Vote, For services not provided for, 5327 9s. 6d., agreed to. Sums irrecoverable by the Crown required to be written off departmental accounts, $25 4s. j .. agreed to. Resolutions reported. Mr. SEDDON moved, That the item. f. "Fuel, light, &c., Government Houses." te restored. The money had already been paid. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) said he would o .: oppose the motion, but he thought reasonable economy should be observed. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) snes, sted to the Premier that the principal objection to 
<page>1251</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1291</url>
of what had already appeared in the main estimates. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) protested against what he considered to be an excessive amount paid to the Governor during the present session of Parliament. He was, however, not prepared to offer any further opposition to the item being restored if that was the wish of the House. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said he also voted for the excision of this item, and the vote was the strongest indication the House could give of its objection to the most unseemly and lavish expenditure of money that had taken place during the past year. If he thought he could do the slightest good he would call for a division against the motion to recommit. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City) said that he put the question to the Minister in charge of the item-it was not the Premier-whether this amount of $50 was not, as being in excess of the amount fixed by statute for the Go- vernor's allowance, illegal but for the Public Revenues Act of last session. He was of opinion, also, that, as it was increasing the Go- vernor's emoluments, the Appropriation Bill would require to be reserved for the Royal assent if that item was not struck out ; so that it appeared to him that honourable members were simplifying the Premier's position by striking the item out. Mr. HALL-JONES said he pointed out in Committee on this vote that since the time there was a Governor in New Zealand this item had always been borne by the colony. It  was part of the contract entered into by the colony with the Governor, and therefore the colony should carry it out. The late Auditor- General used to pass the amount when voted on   the estimates in the usual way; but the present Auditor-General would not do so without a vote on the estimates specially indicating that it was in excess of the Governor's Salary and Allow- ances Act. On the motion to consider the resolutions reported from Committee of Supply, Mr. SEDDON moved, That the item, £50, Government Houses, struck off the vote of £1,050 for public buildings, be restored. Motion agreed to. Resolutions agreed to. PUBLIC WORKS BILL. A message was received from the Legislative Council to the effect that the Council had passed this Bill with certain amendments. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved, That the amendments be disagreed with, and that Mr. Field, Mr. Barclay, and himself be appointed Managers to draw up reasons for so disagreeing. Motion agreed to. Subsequently, Mr. SEDDON brought up the following reasons assigned by the House for disagreeing with the amendments made by the Legislative Council in this Bill :- "1. That the Bill is intended to remedy great loss, inconvenience, and hardship which is being suffered by numbers of property owners ' The Public Works Acts Amendment Act, 1900'; and also to prevent the unsightly ap- pearance which streets will present if that sec- tion remains unaltered. "2. That the amendments of the Legislative Council, if agreed to, would result in the con- tinuance of the evils above referred to." He moved, That the reasons be agreed to. Reasons agreed to. Subsequently, a message was received from the Legislative Council, forwarding the follow- ing reasons for insisting on the Council's amend- ment in this Bill :- "The proviso struck out would, if passed, throw additional expense on the local autho- rity in connection with the widening of streets." Mr. SEDDON moved, That the House do not insist on its disagreement with the amendment made by the Legislative Council. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City) said he thought the proviso which had been struck out was the only part of the Bill which was of any use. He would sooner see the Bill hung up alto- gether than see it passed without the proviso. Motion agreed to. APPROPRIATION BILL. This Bill was read a first time. On the question, That the Bill be read a second times, Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) said, - Sir, I desire to take advantage of the present opportu- nity, as it is the only opportunity I shall have before the session closes, to read to the House . correspondence which passed between myself and the Assets Realisation Board in reference to an offer I made to purchase a portion of the Glentui Estate. I do not intend to take longer than I possibly can in placing the matter before the House and the country. It is not my in- tention in this speech to go into the question. What I intend doing is to read the corre- spondence. During the last week I wrote to the General Manager of the Assets Board, and I have obtained from him copies of all letters written by me to the Board, and of all letters written by the Board to me. The correspon- dence between myself and the Board was as follows :- "Wellington, 30th October, 1901. "SIR,-Copies of my letters addressed to you in 1898, re an offer to purchase a portion of the Glentui Estate, having been destroyed by fire in May last, will you be good enough to give me copies of the said letters ?- Yours, &c., "R. MEREDITH. "The Manager, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington." " Assets Realisation Board, Wellington, 1st November, 1901. "DEAR SIR,-I am in receipt of your favour of 30th ultimo, and in response to request therein have pleasure in enclosing copies of letters received from you in the connection .- Yours truly, " WALTER G. FOSTER, General Manager. "R. Meredith, Esq., M.H.R., Wellington." 
<page>1252</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1292</url>
" SIR, - I have to thank you for copies of my letters addressed to your Board during the year 1898. Will you be good enough to forward me, not later than Wednesday evening next, copies of your letters to me in reply to my letters of 1898 ?- Yours faithfully, "R. MEREDITH. "The Manager, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington." " Assets Realisation Board, Wellington, 5th November, 1901. "DEAR SIR, -As requested in your letter of yesterday's date, we enclose copies of our letters to you, dated 26th April, 1898; 19th May, 1898 ; and 3rd June, 1898 .- Yours faithfully, "W. C. CUFF, Pro General Manager. " R. Meredith, Esq., M.H.R., Wellington." "Tullamore, Springbank, 8th April, 1898. " SIR,-Will you be good enough to inform me if your Board will sell me from 500 acres to 1,500 acres of the Glentui Run, partly pastoral and partly agricultural? I am aware that to- wards the close of last session of Parliament you signified your intention of having the Glentui property cut up and offered for sale by November of the present year ; I therefore anticipate your subdivision by approaching your Board at the present time. Please give me full particulars as to locality, acreage, price, &c .- Yours faithfully, "R. MEREDITH. "The Chairman, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington." " Assets Realisation Board, Wellington, 26th April, 1898. " DEAR SIR,-Glentui Estate : I have to ac- knowledge the receipt of your letter of the 8th instant, in reference to the purchase of portion of the above estate. We are quite willing and are desirous to sell, but at the present time the difficulty is that we have temporary license over the leasehold only, the time of which expires very shortly. As long as we hold that pastoral country we need the whole of our freehold in case of bad winters. Still, I should be sorry to miss a chance of a purchaser, and if you will point out to us the country you re- quire we will, if possible, endeavour to meet your wishes .- Yours faithfully, "WALTER G. FOSTER, General Manager. "R. Meredith, Esq., Tullamore, Springbank." "Tullamore, Springbank, 12th May, 1898. "DEAR SIR,-In reply to yours of the 26th ultimo, re the purchase of a portion of the Glentui Estate, I regret that I was in the most distant portion of my electorate when your letter reached my address. " We (myself and son) have been this day at Glentui, and went over a considerable portion of the freehold, and have decided to apply to you for that portion of the estate extending from the Ashley Gorge Bridge, and bounded on the north by the main road, at the east by the road running from the said main road to I you 25 per cent. cash, balance in three years, at Mr. Meredith by the River Ashley, containing about 500 acres, and marked on the enclosed plan, " No. 1A," in red. This block has had some surface-sowing of cocksfoot, varies very much in quality, being patchy ; some fair land, including about 40 acres of swamp, with stony flats containing large boulders predominating, largely covered with gorse, broom, and couch ; all the fences out of repair ; purely sheep country. We also apply for 500 acres, or any less portion, to the east of the road forming the eastern boundary of Block 1. This block varies very much in quality, from swamp land to light stony land, and is not improved other than a few drains in the swamp, and the fences being in fair condi- tion. There is a small whare on Block No. 1. No buildings whatever on Block 11. Block 11 does not include any of the English-grass pad- docks. So far as I could judge, not any of the land I am applying for has ever been broken up. I enclose you my map, as it enables me to define what I want. " Will you now be good enough, as you have given me the hope you will offer me the land, to state the value you place on the land, and the terms and conditions on which you are pre- pared to sell? This land would suit me, as my home is situated only a few miles from the place, and I could work it for sheep in conjunc- tion with my agricultural homestead. " If convenient to you, or to one of the mem- bers of your Board, I would suggest, in case you are not conversant with the land in ques- tion, instead of leaving the valuation to an out- sider you might come and see the property yourself, and I would arrange, if necessary or desirable, to meet you .- Yours truly, " R. MEREDITH. " W. G. Foster, Esq., General Manager, Assets Realisation Board, Welington." " Christchurch, 19th May, 1898. "DEAR SIR,-I am in receipt of your letter of 12th, and am intending to bring the matter before my Board at next meeting, with a view of fixing reserves in the various portions of the estate. " We are having many inquirers for farms on the Glentui, and it may be that the Board will decide to adhere to its usual practice of first offering by auction. I will, however, give you early advice in reply to your inquiries .- Yours faithfully, "WALTER G. FOSTER, General Manager, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington. "R. Meredith, Esq., M.H.R., Springbank." "Tullamore, Springbank, 28th May, 1898. "SIR,-Re Glentui Freehold : In reference to my former letter applying for about 1,000 acres of the Glentui freehold, and your reply to the said letter, I may state that I am now pre- pared to make you a definite offer for the land as described by me in my former application to purchase. I will give you the Government valuation with 5 per cent. added ; I will pay 
<page>1253</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1293</url>
me an answer by Friday, the 3rd June next, by letter, or by wire addressed to Rangiora for me. I have another property in view in case you are not willing to negotiate with me .- Yours faithfully, "R. MEREDITH. "The Manager, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington." " Assets Realisation Board, Wellington, 3rd June, 1898. "DEAR SIR, - Glentui Estate : I have brought the matter of the sale of this property before my Board, and am instructed to inform appli- cants that it will be surveyed at an early date, and offered by auction about November next. I thank you for your inquiries and offer, but, understanding you have expressed a wish that the public should have an opportunity of pur- chasing at auction, the Board has not been unmindful of your views .- Yours faithfully, " WALTER G. FOSTER, General Manager. "R. Meredith, Esq., Springbank." I have now read the correspondence which passed between me and the Assets Board. I addressed three letters to the Board, and re- ceived from the Board three replies. A portion of the land in question was sold on the 17th November, 1898, seven months after I had written these letters, and the rest on the 21st December, 1899. I now give the lots, acreage, price per acre, and names of purchasers :-  Sale of Glentui Estate, at Oxford, by Messrs. Ford and Ingram. Name of Price per Lot. Area. Purchaser. Acre. #cc-zero Sold on 17th November, 1898. £ d. A. R. P. S. 10 James White. 2:21 2 0 1 0 283 James Judson. 3 5 17 G 1 0 110 0 36 R. H. Parish. 5 8 2 6 7 12 5A 153 3 13 6 J. Judson. 250 3 18 6 3 G 7 P. Rvan. 212 0 32 7 7 5 0 R. Blunden. 180 8 5 2 1 6 R. Henderson. 280 3 31 9 5 15 0 Sold on 21st December, 1899. W. Brock. 7 2 15 0 44 0 1 165 H. Meyer. 6 2 3 5 0 4 J. O'Halloran. 238 0 10 0 0 9 10 6 0 20 305 6 2 11 W. Berry. 5 12 0 3 0 305 8 James Rudd. 0 0 6 0 13 242 0 J. O'Halloran. 14 0 1,300 0 3 10 0 15 329 4 10 3 16 0 Dohrman Bros. 16 575 0 1 10 0 0 17 746 0 0 2 0 0 W. Vincent. 18 364 0 2 7 0 4 936 0 20 1 15 19 0 The following were the terms :- " Five per cent. of purchase-money on fall of hammer ; 10 per cent. to be paid on 28th Feb- February, 1903 ; balance to be paid 28th Feb- ruary, 1905; interest meantime at 4} per cent. per annum." Clause 12 of "The Valuation of Land Act, 1896," gives the conditions under which the Government, under the Land for Settlements Act, have power to purchase. It says,- " In any case where land is taken or acquired under the provisions of 'The Land for Settle- ments Act, 1894,' the sum to be offered by the Minister shall be a sum not less than the valuation of the land appearing on the general valuation-roll, and if such offer is not accepted by the owner, then the compensation payable shall, in the case of lands acquired or taken under 'The Land for Settlements Act, 1894,' be ascertained by the Court and in the manner prescribed by that Act, and, in the case of lands acquired or taken under 'The Public Works Act, 1894,' by the Court and in the manner prescribed by that Act." Sir, I have now given the whole of the correspondence that passed between me and the Assets Board. Honourable members will notice at once that I did not offer to pur- chase fifteen hundred acres. I had not copies of these letters by me last week when this question came up before the House, as all my manuscript papers were destroyed in a fire which destroyed my dwellinghouse on the 5th May last. I had to get copies of my corre- spondence from the Assets Board. Honourable members will notice that I applied for not more than a thousand acres-one block of five hundred acres, and a second for five hundred acres or any less quantity. As the question was gone into on a previous occasion, I do not think it desirable to say anything more. I have read the correspondence, which will go into Hansard, and will place the case before the country. I regret what took place on Thursday last in the House, in consequence of the Premier making the statement which I felt it my duty to flatly contradict. I have been eleven years in the House, and desired to maintain the dignity and high character that has always been characteristic of our Par- liament, and I regret the circumstance on that account, and on that account only. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) .- Honour- able members, I have no doubt, feel at the pre- sent time like persons at the end of a long voyage, who at last come within sight of their destination. We have had a long voyage of nineteen weeks, and are now about to arrive at our destination. I think it will not be in- appropriate that some references should be made to what are the outstanding features of the session which is now drawing to a close. I think that honourable members and the country will recognise that the most important thing that has happened in connection with this session has been the criticism with regard to the financial position of the colony, and it is that to which I desire briefly first to refer. Last March, in the speech which I delivered at Riccarton, I referred to the increase of the ex- penditure which was going on, and I pointed 
<page>1254</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1294</url>
of the colonial finances, the result being that the expenditure was increasing to an alarming extent. During the session the facts have all gone to prove that what I said was really the case. A few days ago the quarterly returns for the September quarter were published, and they throw a ghastly light upon the weak financial condition of the colony at present as compared with what it was only a year ago. During the six months ending 30th September there was an increase in the revenues of the colony amounting to £111,762. That, Sir, is an import- ant item, because it indicates that the colony is in a prosperous condition. No one would deny that that is the case. I have no idea of throw- ing any doubt upon the splendid prosperity which the colony enjoys. I am not prepared to say it will continue, because there is a heavy shrinkage in the value of our wool, which is one of the staple products of the colony, and that is bound to tell later in the financial year, although, as it has not probably come to account yet, it is not felt by the people of the colony. Up to the present they are, I presume, liv- ing upon the advances made a year ago. It is only when the present wool season is com- pleted that the position will be fully realised. But, Sir, turning now to the expenditure, I find that the expenditure is £328,000 for the half-year in excess of what it was during the same period of the previous financial year, and this is bound to tell its tale upon the colonial finances. The increase of revenue of £111,000 is thus swallowed up twice over. Your revenues are increasing only by 7.30. £111,000 per half-year, while your ex- penditure is increasing by £328,000. However you may be able to stave off the evil day, the time will come when the Treasurer will find himself-I will not say in difficulties, but attacked by anxieties which in this colony there should be no need for. Now, judging from the Public Accounts, one would think we are not very far off that condition now. The Treasurer started the financial year with cash in the Public Account to the amount of £522,000. By the end of the first quarter that £522,000 had disappeared, and he found himself with a debit balance on the Public Account of $96,849. At the close of the September quarter the debit balance had been paid off, but the Treasurer found himself with only £5,348 in cash in the Public Account, as against £317,662 at the same date of the previous year. Again, although the old-age pension payments must during the half- year have amounted to at least $100,000, only £43,230 has been brought to account during the whole of the half-year, the remainder of the £60,000 unexpended being presumably repre- sented as advances in the hands of officers of the Government which are recorded in the state- ment. I do not know that it is necessary I should refer in detail to the increase of ex- penditure shown in connection with the public service of the colony during the half-year just ended as compared with the same period of the previous year, but some of them are as follows: Colonial Secretary, £42,102; Post- Mr. G. W. Russell Defence, £52,540 ; Agriculture, €13,750. Those which I have stated total altogether somewhere about $221,000 for those five departments of 1 the public service. In addition to the points I have referred to, there is one item which re- quires explanation in connection with the Deposit Account. The Imperial Government deposited in the hands of the Government during the September quarter $24,422 as balances due to the Fourth and Fifth South African Contingents. Those troops returned to New Zealand on the 10th July, but down to the 30th September, according to the Public Accounts, the sum of only £269 had been paid to the men. I think that was surely a very striking comment upon the praise that had been given to our noble young men who had gone and served the Empire and our country in South Africa, more especially when the money was really deposited in the hands of the Go- vernment by the Imperial authorities to pay them. I would point out also that during the quarter ended the 30th September, 1901, the Treasury bills in support of revenue were no less than £120,000 more than they were for the same period of the previous year. This session there have been several important developments in connection with the colony. One that has been condemned, and justly so, has been the enormous growth of the defence expenditure. A few years ago, before the South African war broke out, the colony set about, in a businesslike way and according to our means, the extension and improvement of our defences; but we recognised we were a young country, and that our ambition should be that of colonisation rather than that of aping the extravagances of a semi-military Power. I have heard the Premier, before he made his visit to England-and I have admired him for it -state that roads and bridges were more important in this country than expensive defences. Well, the world is changing in some respects, and no doubt the defences should be improved compared with what they were & number of years ago; but when I see the tremendous growth of our defence expenditure I cannot help feeling some alarm and sorrow. During this session £213,000 has been passed on the consolidated estimates for defence, and in connection with the public-works estimates another £180,000, making a total of $393.000: and I do not think that covers the whole of the defence expenditure. We see in the City of Wellington evidence that the military spirit is taking an undue and imprudent hold upon the community, and the Government are fanning this to an extent that I think is un- desirable. The result will be that the colony will be compelled in time to insist upon th? military expenditure being reduced to some- thing like a normal level. Let us by all means assist our Volunteers, and let our youths be trained ; let us provide them with the best and latest weapons : but there is a tendency. which I regard as most unfortunate, to create something like a military caste in the colony. and to regard men who devote themseives to 
<page>1255</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1295</url>
colony than those who devote themselves to the peaceful arts of colonisation and the de- velopment of the colony. I desire to draw attention to the large amount of money spent by the Minister for Railways on rolling-stock. I have no doubt he believes the increase is necessary ; but when we find £576,000 on the public - works estimates voted for increased rolling-stock, and that we have now passed another £25,000 on the supplementary esti- mates for the same purpose, I cannot but ex- press my regret that so large a portion of this rolling-stock has been imported from outside, instead of being made in the colony. And I express still greater disappointment at the fact that throughout the whole of this session there has been no declaration that the Government propose to spend any part of the money given to them for additions to open lines in extending the workshops in our own colony and increasing the plant, so that the Govenment workshops may be able to take up a large part of the work of constructing rolling-stock in the colony. I trust that before the session closes the Minister for Railways will be able to indicate that the Government have not forgotten this. I trust that the Government is not likely in the course of another year or two to find that further large importations of rolling-stock will be necessary to meet the growing traffic of the railway system. One matter to which I wish to refer is that this year the Workers' Compensation Act has not been amended and extended to agricul- tural labourers. The Right Hon. the Premier gave, I will say, a qualified promise last ses- sion that the legislation that might be intro- duced by the Imperial Government would be placed on the statute-book of this colony. I regret that the session closes without any amendment to the Workers' Compensation Act, so that the farmers of the colony have no means of knowing now, except by appeal to the legal tribunals, whether they are or are not under the provisions of the Workers' Compen- sation Act. My opinion is that the Premier in that matter made a mistake. The farmers of the colony are not averse to being brought under the provisions of the Workers' Compen- sation Act. I believe the agricultural labourers desire this should be done, and I regard it as unfair and illogical that, while the labour laws apply to the whole of the artisans in the cities, the workers on the farms of the colony should be debarred from the privilege of the protection that is given by the Workers' Compensation Act. If I am told in reply that they are already under the provisions of that Act, then I say it is to be regretted that some distinct pronounce- ment of that nature has not been made ; and, at any rate, no harm could possibly have been done had the Government introduced the English Act, which I quoted in a speech delivered the other day on the matter, because in that case the precedents of the English Courts would have been available for the assistance of our own tribunals in settling the question. Sir, the Crown Tenants' Rebate Bill, which was to have been amended by the Government during passed last year. No amendment has been made to that obnoxious and iniquitous measure, which has caused more dissatisfaction among the Crown tenants of the colony than any measure placed on our statute-book for some years past. The administration of that Act has been faulty in the extreme. The Govern- ment have laid down no line of interpretation for the Receivers of Land Revenue. The result is that in different land districts of the colony the law is differently interpreted, and the effect is that there is no finality as far as the rebate is concerned. But I have a still greater com- plaint against the Government in connection with the settlers throughout the colony. In the course of the Financial Statement, under the heading of "Crown Tenants' Rebate of Rents," the Treasurer said, - " Last session the Rebate of Crown Tenants Act was passed. Its working has not been satisfactory, or equitable in its incidence. An amendment of the Act is necessary, and at this juncture it is well to speak plainly, for from facts which have come within my own know- ledge it is quite clear that a person taking up bush land, and having little or no capital, can- not pay rent until the land yields a return. There are practically no returns for two years. By that time two years' rent are in arrear, and the yield is not sufficient to maintain the settler and his family. Another two years pass over, and still find him behind in payment of his rent, or, if he has paid the rent, he has pro- bably had to borrow the money for that pur- pose. Under these circumstances it is much better that the State should insist upon the improvement conditions being strictly com- plied with, and allow the tenant to sit rent-free for the first four or five years. After that time the tenant would be in a position to pay the rent, and the anxiety and worry caused under the conditions now existing would be avoided. There is also another point worthy of being taken into consideration - namely, that, al- though there is a large area of Crown land available for settlement, most of it is inacces- sible, and situated a long way from the centres of population, and is not of extra good quality ; therefore some inducement is necessary, which, if given, will tend to promote settlement of the people on our Crown lands, and relieve the ex- isting congestion among those who prefer to go upon the lands acquired under the Land for Settlements Act, thus avoiding the hardships which fall to the lot of the pioneer or back- blocks settler." Sir, there was a great deal of truth in those remarks of the Treasurer, and it is to be re- gretted that the session closes without the benefit being given to the back-block settlers of the concessions promised several months ago by him in the Financial Statement, delivered so long ago as the 16th August. And why has that concession not been given ? The Govern- ment brought down a Bill to give that con- cession to the back-block settlers. We have the Bill before us ; but it is not passed. Why ? | I do not desire to peer into Ministerial secrets 
<page>1256</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1296</url>
to ascertain why so important a measure has been kept to the dying hours of the session. The Bill, which was promised as far back as the 16th August, only made its appearance before us yesterday, and the Government have not been able to pass it because of want of time in the concluding hours of the session. I leave the Government to explain why, with that paragraph in the Financial Statement, they continue the Crown Tenants' Rebate Act, which they state themselves has not worked in a satisfactory or equitable manner. Sir, I leave them to explain why the back-block settlers are to be left for another year without any relief from the troubles the right honour- able gentleman detailed. Another paragraph in the Speech from the Throne dealt with the Land for Settlements Act and the earth-hunger that was experienced. That earth-hunger still continues, but for some reason the Govern- ment is unable to keep pace with the demand for land-settlement. Instead of that, we have a number of small sections purchased by the Government as workmen's homes, village and hamlet settlements, which in some cases are not applied for by the public, who apparently do not want land in these small holdings ; whilst the larger class of sections, which would provide reasonable-sized homes for men who desire to start as farmers for themselves, are not being purchased to the extent by the Go- vernment they should be. I congratulate the Government on one important development of policy during the present session. I refer to the Bill passed for opening State coal mines. I believe the effect of that will be to open  a new line for industrial development for the colony, and will show that New Zealand in this matter is keeping pace with the pro- gressive spirit of its population; and I be- lieve also it will have the effect of lowering the present extortionate and unreasonable price of coal. One very important matter that has come before the Parliament is the action of the Government in proposing to grant £442, in defiance of the provisions of the Dis- qualification Act, for the purpose of rewarding the Federation Commissioners who were mem- bers of Parliament during their absence from New Zealand. I notice clause 22 of the Appro- priation Bill is intended to deal with the matter. There is here an important difference in the clause from the explanation that was given by the Right Hon. the Premier in Committee of Supply when this vote was being taken. In Committee of Supply the Premier stated that the computation upon which this sum of £442 -which I will parenthetically remark repre- sents £88 8s. to each of the five Federal Com- missioners who were members of Parliament - I say the Premier stated that that sum was in- tended to provide them with two guineas per day during the time they were in Australia; but that statement is not supported by the clause that is in the Bill now before the House. This clause contemplates the payment of £1 2s. per day for the Commissioners for the « hole of the time they were engaged in connection with the Commission. Mr G. W. Russell Mr. SEDDON .- No. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Then, all I can say is you will have to amend the Bill if that is not the case. The members of the Commission who were not members of Parliament were paid 1 the sum of $3 3s. per day for their services \-. during the whole time. According to the pay- ments under the Disqualification Act, as com- muted by the more recent Act, members of the House were paid only £1 per day for their expenses ; but the Government apparently have made up their minds to take a new departure, which seems to imply this extraordinary posi- tion : that, while the members of the Federa. tion Commission are to be paid £3 2s. during the whole of the time they were employed in Australia on the Commission, the members of the Rivers Commission, the Coal-mines Com- mission, the Teachers' Salaries Commission, and the Midland Railway Commission all of which, with the exception of the Coal- mines Commission, had members of Parlia- ment as members of those Commissions-are to be paid only £1 per day for their expenses. This is a distinction that has no business to exist, and it is improper that such a distinction should have been made by the Government. If any alteration is required, that alteration should be made by an amendment of the Dis. qualification Act. I do not say that members of Parliament should receive only £1 per day when on Commissions. I think, myself, that that small payment entails an unreasonable sacrifice on the part of members of Parlia- ment who accept positions on Royal Com- missions ; but I say that everything that is done should be done according to the law, and if the law stands in the way the law should be altered. I do not desire to de- tain honourable members any longer, but I have thought it desirable to express these opinions in connection with the closing hours of the session. I believe that the session will in some respects be regarded as historical, from the fact that it has been the one in which the State Coal-mines Act has been passed. I believe also the free criticism that has been in- dulged in by members on this side of the House has shown the Government that, while there is no organized Opposition, members of the House are alive to a sense of duty, and that party ties have not the same hold on them as existed in days past. We have to realise that we are not sent here merely as party marionettes, but that we have a duty to perform to the country ; and I believe that the more free and outspoken our criticism is the better it is for the colony. I have to thank honourable members for the courtesy with which they have listened to me after the long sitting of the House, which has now nearly come to an end. Sir J. G. WARD (Minister for Railways) .- The honourable member has given us what he calls the outstanding features in connection with this session, and he commenced by saying that he would speak in connection with the financial position of the colony, and he indulged in some criticism concerning it. The honour- able member referred to a speech which he 
<page>1257</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1297</url>
he then indicated that the increased expendi- ture of the colony was alarming, and he then prophesied a deficit, I think, of $400,000. His predictions were completely falsified, as, instead of a deficit, we had a surplus of £532,564 at the close of the 31st March last. The actual surplus for the year itself was $427,213. The difference between the revenue, 55,906,916, and the ex- penditure, $5,479,703, and the balance remain- ing after transferring $500,000 to the Public Works Fund from the previous year of $105,351 added to the year's balance of $427,213 gave us the surplus of $532,564 to begin the financial year with. What is the honourable gentleman's criticism as regards the financial position of the colony ? No one denies that the expenditure has gone up. That the depart mental expenditure has increased is admitted ; but where it is possible for the Government to keep down the depart- mental expenditure and the growth of ordinary expenditure it is the duty of the Government to do so. We are fully alive to that. But when considering the expenditure of the colony as a whole you must, as a matter of fairness, take into account whether that expenditure is nor- mal or non-recurrent ; and you should also con- sider the position of the revenue of the colony to ascertain whether the barometer is fair to medium, or is rising or falling. You should sce whether the increase in the revenue is nor- mal also. What did the honourable member say? While he said the quarterly returns pre- sented a ghastly light, he said the increase in the expenditure was $328,000 for the half year ;  but he either forgot or would not say that a great portion of that was non-recurrent. The honourable member then went on to admit- what there is no gainsaying-that the colony was prosperous ; and then, owing to the present value of wool, he predicted a possible fall in the revenue and a reverse of the prosperous state of affairs, and that bad times might come to the colony. Ever since I have been in the House there has always been some startling predic- tion of that kind ; our prices for the staple products vary ; one year it has been in con- nection with wool, another year frozen meat is on the downward path, or our grain, or our butter and cheese. But, fortunately, this colony has not all its eggs in one basket ; it has always been in the position that when one of our staple products has been on the downward scale some other one has maintained a high value and filled up the gap. I regret exceed- ingly the fall in our great product wool, and I hope it may not long continue. All we can do is to do all in our power to create fresh markets, and assist in the development of the country in that way ; and it is clearly the duty of the Government to give effect to a policy of that character. No one can say the Govern- ment bas not done its utmost in that direction ; any way you look at it, whether in connec- tion with assisting the producers to get cheaper freights to the Old World or sending men to improve the condition of the markets, the Go- vernment have been doing everything in their power in this direction, and will continue to do sible financial collapse owing to the fall in wool ; but we have a buoyant country, and one that will be able, as it has in the past, to meet its troubles, and the indomitable spirit of the people of the country will assist them to overcome the pass- ing troubles referred to by the honourable gentleman. He further referred to the fact that the increase in the expenditure of the colony was £328,000 for the half-year, and he went on to say there were indications of an evil day arising -- that we might stave it off, but that the present position was marked by grave anxiety. But, in referring to the fact that the expenditure of the colony had gone up, you must realise what the colony is doing, and take into consideration the fact that last year the colony reduced taxation by over $300,000, and that the bulk of the increased expenditure is due to unusual and non-recurring causes. And when you are discussing and talking about 8.0. the increase in the relative position of the finances of the colony you must, I say, keep before you the fact that we made a very large remission of taxation last year, of which the colony as a whole has the benefit. Now, when the honourable member is considering the finances of the colony, how does he do it? Does he go down the gamut of the depart- ments and give the amounts of the large con- cessions made last year ? I think not, for almost every department has shown that, not- withstanding the concessions that have been made or the increases of revenue in each of them this year, they have in the increased volume of business shown that in the gross results of revenue, and in nearly every case in the net results also, they have made up by a long way the $300,000 remissions, and that will favourably affect the future of the colony. Then, the honourable member referred to the fact that the increase in the Colonial Secretary's Department was $42,102 ; in the Postmaster- General's Department, $21,063 ; in the Rail- ways, £92,000 ; in Agriculture, $13,750 ; and, in the Defence Department, $52,540: making a total of about #221,000. Now, I propose for one moment to devote myself to these figures. First of all, the honourable member, and every member of the House, knows that the £42,000 increase in the Colonial Secretary's Depart- ment is not an annual increase. It is an abnormal one, and one to which we have a right to refer to show the unfairness of the strictures about the increase of expenditure, be- cause it is not recurrent. I cannot go through all the items, but honourable members know that included in this amount is a large part of the cost of the Royal visit. That is a disap- pearing item, and is not recurrent, as is also census expenditure, which is also included, and that is non-recurrent. The honourable member says that free criticism is a good thing for the Administration and for the country. That we all admit ; but it is no use of the honourable member presenting only one side of the picture to the country, and that side the worst side, and imagining that we are going to let him misrepresent by only giving the one side. The 
<page>1258</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1298</url>
side to the colony as far as the administration and the policy of the Government go. He has been unfair to the colony and unjust to the Government when he puts forth the fact that we have an increase of $221,000 without stating a set-off or giving the causes of any sort or kind. Take the railways as a case in point : There we have an increase of £92.000 in our expenditure ; but what about the increase of its revenue ? was only a day or two ago since I stated the fact that the increase of revenue for the last six months alone, by comparison with the cor- responding period of last year, was #87,000, and that the last four weeks was nearly £14,000 better than the corresponding period of last year. Mr. R. MCKENZIE. - Due mostly to the Roval visit. Sir J. G. WARD .- If the honourable mem- ber would go into the figures since the Royal visitors left-take those of the last month, which is regarded as about the worst month for the year, when there were no Royalty here at all-he would find that the figures show nearly €14,000 more than for the same month of the year before. The increase in the Postal Department is due entirely to growth of busi- ness, and the same applies to the Agricultural Department. I pass on for one moment to refer to the statement of the honourable member for Riccarton regarding the item £24,000, deposit of balance due to Fourth and Fifth Contingents. The honourable member said that from the 10th July to the 30th Sep- tember there was only £269 paid to these men,  and he wanted an explanation why this was the case. Very well, I can give the desired explanation. The members of the contingents have been paid off as rapidly as possible. The Under-Secretary for Defence and the other officers paid off the men as fast as they could. They could not do so blindfold. The members of the contingents have been paid as rapidly as possible. The Under-Secretary for Defence and other officers paid off the men, and the accounts of the payments they have made during the September quarter-that is, during the month of September, the money only having been re- ceived in September-will be charged during the September quarter, after the accounts have been duly audited. The whole amount requires to and will be charged to the succeeding quarter to that to which the honourable member refers. If he looks at the December quarter he will find that the total amount will have been paid : and they could not pay it before, because the officers had not the full accounts in some cases, and duplications of the accounts were required from South Africa, so there is nothing in the point made by the honourable member. Now, I think it is necessary for me to refer to the honourable member's statement regarding the €120,000 of Treasury bills that were issued in excess of the amount for the same period last year. This is an item in connection with the finances of the colony that necessarily fluctuates, owing to the particular conditions of the moment. The honourable member knows Sir J. G. Ward every-day finance in the issue of Treasury bills an increase gives no indication whatever that the Treasury is out of joint financially-it is what I may term the bread-and-butter side of carrying on the finances of the colony ; and it is necessary, just as a tradesman has a till for silver and gold to enable the daily cash trans- actions of his business to be carried out. The fact that his gold or silver was less at the end It of the day than at the beginning would not imply he was worse off, as in all probability he had taken cheques in exchange, or had even purchased something with his bread-and-butter cash from the till ; and so with Treasury bills. There is, therefore, no point in referring to them. Now, I pass on from that to another statement made by the honourable member. He referred to the abnormal expenditure in connection with the Defence Department of the colony. The Right Hon. the Minister of De. fence will deal with this matter, doubtless. if there is time at his disposal, much more fully than I can. But I could not listen to the honourable gentleman's statement of the ex- penditure of $213,000 on the consolidated esti- mates and £180,000 on the Public Works Fund estimates, making a total of $393,000, without realising how misleading such a statement was. First, it is abnormal in many respects ; and. second, it includes a large balance from the previous year. He also referred to the mili- tary spirit which is being created in this colony. The honourable member knows per- fectly well, in regard to the defence expendi- ture, there have been unusual conditions, and that a very large proportion of that amount is abnormal and is non-recurrent ; and the hopour- able member himself took very good care. before concluding his remarks, to put in a good word or two for the Volunteer system of the colony. Well, there are about eighteen thousand Voiun- teers in New Zealand. No one has called upon us to reduce, but rather to increase, the Volun- teer corps of the colony, and so long as you hed the representatives of the people, and the people behind them, are urging that there should be an increase of the Volunteer corps, and that the Volunteer system has now reached a strength ? eighteen thousand, which is larger than in any of the adjacent colonies, we can accept that as an indication that the defence expenditure had to be increased in that direction ; and that in .- crease, so long as it is not of an extravagant character, must be faced if the people want a thoroughly efficient Volunteer system. New. the honourable member referred to this it- crease, and said the people would insist on that large vote being reduced. Why. the Gin vernment themselves will insist on every lange vote being reduced in connection with the de- fences of the colony where they can legitimately do it. We mean to reduce the amount, and very considerably too. But the people here have a great and valuable trust in their poss's. sion, and the day may come when it may be ad object for attack ; it is idle for the most peace- fully disposed amongst us to deny that. Pespe beyond our shores have an eye upon us now, 
<page>1259</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1299</url>
who does not realise that amongst our many re- sponsibilities one of the chief is to see we have the means of defending our shores, of protect- ing our families and our homes, in the event of trouble arising; and it is our bounden and solemn duty to see to the proper defence and maintenance of our country. It will be of no satisfaction or avail to us, should the day ever arrive when the future destiny of our country is assailed, to then lament our want of foresight in being found unprepared. No one can discount the fact, which is every day arising, of the increased value of our great colony, and the inducement it, among other advantages, offers as a base, at some period in the future, of operations for those who want to get close to our neighbours of the Australian Commonwealth. And, while the critical may deprecate the increase of defence expenditure, which they would be perfectly right in doing if it were of a wasteful or unnecessary character, I say it should be the duty of every true well-wisher of this country for years to come to see that within our own borders we have the element of a system that can be relied on for the purpose of maintaining the position of our country, and that this important fact should be apparent to the eyes of the world. In doing that we are only doing that which may be said to be providing an insurance fund for a valuable asset in our pos- session, not for ourselves alone, but for those who for generations to come will follow us. I quite agree with the honourable member when  he says, instead of endeavouring to foster a military spirit, we should endeavour to promote the more peaceful arts of agriculture and matters of that kind. I am as strongly opposed to a spirit of militarism spreading through our country as any one ; but I am not foolish enough because of this to allow it to dim my vision, and therefore not be able to see that we must protect our shores and our people. Does the honourable member mean to tell me that the farmers of this country have aban. doned any of the peaceful arts to which he has alluded in the last few years ? Some of their sons may have done so, and an odd farmer here and there may also have gone to fight in South Africa; but the farmers them- selves, as a body, have not given up in any respect the great industry in which they are concerned in order to take part in what the honourable member refers to as a military spirit which was being created. They have, it is true, and to their everlasting credit, given their sons and their means to assist in main- taining the integrity and the power of our Empire. I say that we in New Zealand ought not to attempt to inflate ourselves with any- thing in the shape of militarism, but we should try to impress upon the farmers and all classes that, while we are prepared to assist them in maintaining the great industry of agriculture in this country, we are also alive to our great and growing responsibilities as a portion of the British Empire. To say that the farmers are desirous of abandoning that industry on account of a military spirit is an insult to them which able member referred to a branch of the service which I at present administer. He got back to his old theme of the Minister for Railways, and he deprecated the expenditure of $576,000 for increased rolling-stock, and $125,000 voted on the supplementary estimates in connection with the necessary railway rolling-stock upon our lines. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- I said " importa- tion." Sir J. G. WARD .- Well, it is not all for im- ported stock; but we are ordering no outside rolling-stock this year at all. Both the Premier and myself have stated in the House, and out- side the House, that the Government were op- posed to the importation of any material from beyond the colony ; but, Sir, the circumstances of the colony were such that we could not supply our lines or carry on the business of the country unless we had the assistance of mate- rial from outside the colony. Although this was necessary owing to the rapid increase of traffic, we decided to import the material greatly against our will, and we have all along said it is not our intention to continue to import ma- terial from outside the colony. Then, he said that no declaration had been made in reference to increasing the railway workshops and in- creasing the plant, and he found fault with my- self for not having, eighteen months ago, when it was found necessary, then made arrange- ments to meet these growing requirements. I am now going to refer him to an important public document, and honourable members will be able to gauge the value of the criticism in regard to what he says was the position eighteen months ago, and what ought to have been done. If any member would turn to D .- 2, page 10, of the Railways Report submitted by me last year, he will find that there is set out for the years 1891 to 1895 an expenditure of $2,500,000 upon additions to open lines, at the rate of $500,000 a year. What is included, among other things, is "Workshops, additions, #12,000 for each year," or £60,000 for the period ; and last year we spent over that sum in connection with the work- shops. I did not fail to grasp the position at all, as the figures indicated in the Statement clearly show, and the whole programme set out there will be found to be,- Additions and improvements to sta- 3 .. 250,000 tions Rebuilding and strengthening bridges 100,000 Improvements of line (curves and .. 100,000 gradients) Signals and telegraphs .. 200,000 Dwellings, additions and improvements 22,000 60,000 Workshops, additions .. . . Relaying 120,000 .. . . Respacing sleepers .. 40,000 .. Fencing 35,000 . . Wharves, additions and improvements 47,000 Ballast plant and ballast sidings 45,000 . . Water-services 9,400 . . Additional locomotives 196,861 .. Additional cars and cost of conversions 182,268 Additional wagons, brake-vans, travel- ling cranes, and cost of converting 
<page>1260</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1300</url>
bogies 638,126 Additional machinery and electric light for workshops 40,345 Automatic continuous brake for exist- ing stock 347,000 Automatic continuous brake for ad- ditional stock to be built .. 67,000 .. A total of $2.500,000. And in the Railways Statement I went on to say,- "To enable the work to be carried on con- tinuously authority will be necessary to carry the votes over from year to year until the works are completed and the votes exhausted, and legislation will be introduced to give effect to this." And yet the honourable member this morn- ing coolly finds fault, and says that eighteen months ago 1 ought to have realised what was required in this particular direction and made some arrangements in this respect. Why, Sir, there is the whole report, not only for last year, but providing for the five years, foreshadowing the programme to meet not only the exigencies of the moment on the railways that then ex- isted, but to provide for the enormous growth that is going on year by year in this country, and which requires to be met. When the honourable member talks to me of not having done what was required, he must either have- I was going to say wilfully misrepresented the position, but I will not say that-but he must have supposed, at all events, that I would forget that I was alive eighteen months ago,  and had done nothing in the direction of trying to improve our rolling - stock, whereas I had done so over the whole period of five years. Although the member for Riccarton has not done so, I am glad to say that the colony has recognised that the improvement has been material from one end of the colony to the other, and that the business has been met in a way that the public have appreciated. The honourable member is therefore not in any way justified in saying I should have made arrange- ments at that period, because they were made by me, and the authority of the House also got for the expenditure of two millions and a half, and which is now going on; and yet the honour- able member refers somewhat critically to the fact that we went out of the colony in the way he indicated to purchase material to carry on the business railways of the colony. I say now, without a shadow of hesitation, that if we had not, in addition to keeping our workshops going from one end of the colony to the other, also adopted the course of going outside the colony and obtaining additions to our rolling-stock, we would not have been able to meet the extra- ordinary increase of traffic that has taken place throughout the whole of the colony, and we would consequently have interfered with and dislocated trade, and thrown many people in various outside occupations out of work. It has to be remembered that during last year alone 136 miles of open railways were added to the railways of the colony, and during this year about a hundred additional miles will be Sir J. G. Ward power and rolling-stock of all kinds, and the honourable member must know that not only has no man been put off work in any of the workshops, but that some hundreds of addi- tional men have been put on, and have been kept on full time to enable the department to carry out the work in our own shops. Now, in contrast to what the honourable member said had been done in New Zealand during the last twelve months, if any one takes the trouble to refer to the Railways Report he will find that 2,068 vehicles passed through the local work- shops in New Zealand, to say nothing of the hundred and one other works carried on in our shops. I say that at no time in our colony's history has so much work been done in the railway workshops : and the honourable mem- ber's statement is therefore incorrect, and may mislead the unthinking person who does not know the facts. Why, the honourable member, by the statements he made in the course of his remarks, almost made me wonder whether he was trying to take a "rise " out of me, or whether he had himself been asleep, or whe- ther he was serious upon this particular point. The honourable member finds fault with the Government for not keeping pace with the land-settlement of the colony. He takes excer tion to the fact that no rebate of rent has been allowed to the Crown tenants, as he says was indicated last year. Well, Sir, the Government cannot do everything within a limited period. On the one hand, the honourable member finds fault with us for not having altered the Crown tenants' system in the colony, and, on the other hand, he says we cannot keep pace with the land-settlement of the colony. Now, if the honourable gentleman himself were on these benches, and were associated with the very ablest men in the country, he could not pos sibly meet, within a short period, the extra- ordinary demands that are continually being made upon the Government within a year. or even two years. The policy must, as it were, be ahead of the demands made upon it : and I think, if the honourable member will only con- sider the matter for a time, he will see that is the position. But where does the honourable member land himself in connection with this matter? It is the same in connection with the railway workshops. He says in one breath we are increasing our expenditure, and finds fault with us for adding to the public indebtedness. He finds fault with us in very strong terms about the high-water mark of the financial position of the colony, yet before he would up his speech what did he say ? He urged the obtaining of millions of money additional. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- That would nes come out of the Consolidated Fund. Sir J. G. WARD .- I did not say it would come out of the Consolidated Fund. I ato dealing with the financial position of the colony as a whole. The honourable gentleman knows that £500.000 was transferred from the Consolidated Fund last year to the Pable Works Fund ; vot, while the honourable gentle- man urges on the one hand that we are going 
<page>1261</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1301</url>
too fast, and that we require to curtail the deter the proper development of our coalfields, expenditure, and curtail the departmental ex- penditure-I agree with the honourable gentle- man there, and every member of the Ministry desires the same-in the same breath he urges the obtaining of millions of borrowed money, 1 so that more land may be acquired for the , The honourable gentleman was so very un- settlement of the people. Well. as I have said, I interesting in the latter part of his speech that you cannot do all these things at once. To do . he has not much right to be fastidious. Then all this within a year or two would require an extraordinary expenditure-a sum we would not be warranted in asking the House to assent to. So, while he deprecates the increase of our indebtedness and says we are going too fast in one direction, he urges that we should proceed very much faster in two other directions. Therefore he is clearly most inconsistent. In carrying on the land-settlement policy the Government must proceed as they have pro- ceeded during the last eight or nine years- vigorously but prudently ; and as land is being obtained we must road it as far as possible, and that policy we must and will carry out as far as it is in our power to carry it out. We conceive that to be our duty, and we are doing it now, although not so fast as we ourselves desire. We are carrying on our railway-lines throughout the colony, and employing on those important works a very large number of men. Work of that kind, however, is in time bound to come to a diminishing-point, and it is well that the Government should acquire lands in various parts of the colony, not only for fresh settlers from outside to come to our colony and take up, but so that these men now employed making our railways may also go upon the land if they choose; and in that way they would be absorbed, and would not, when our railway. con- struction ceases, come into the labour-market. If the honourable gentleman were to take an impartial view of what the Government is doing, instead of being hypercritical in his criticisms, he would wear a happier aspect ; he would be bound to honestly admit that the policy of the Government was a good one for the country as a whole, and that it had added and would still add materially to its prosperity. My honourable friend would to-day have looked much happier and much more pleasant if he could put his hand on his heart and say that he himself occupied his old position. But he has drifted off, and he knows not to where he is drifting. The honourable member, in the course of his speech, did say one word of congratula- tion, and in respect to that I echo the senti- ments which he gave utterance to. He con- gratulated the colony upon having decided to acquire a State coal-mine. I think it is a great thing for the country that we have decided to acquire a State coal-mine, and that will assist us in carrying on the great departments which largely utilise coal. This policy will assist us not only in obtaining our own fuel, but will, I think, have the very desirable effect of steady. ing the price of coal in New Zealand, and prevent any undue rise owing to rings, combinations, or other causes in the different centres of the colony such as apparently there has been in the past, aud which must have done so much to VOL. CXIX .- 81. and also to restrict and interfere injuriously with some of our manufacturing industries. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- How much longer are you going to speak ? Sir J. G. WARD. Until I have finished. he said something about the £442 paid to the Federal Commissioners who are members of Parliament. I think he said he would have preferred to see the Disqualification Act amended. And so would I have preferred it. An Hon. MEMBER .- Why is it not ? Sir J. G. WARD. - " Why is it not ?" The honourable member might as well call for the moon. In the first place, it was during the recess that the Federal Commission was set up, and the honourable member knows per- fectly well-at least, I hope he will see upon mature consideration-that we could not then have done anything in that way. We could not have made provision in any other way than we are now doing. There is no member of the House who, outside the House, has suggested that the Disqualification Act should be amended, and we could not have asked for consideration to members of Commissions excepting to those who went across the sea. There is no member of the House who has voiced the proposal in the direction now indicated, and yet when the Government make a fair proposal to meet in a proper manner an unusual position they say, "Why did you not amend the Disqualification Act?" An Hon. MEMBER .- The Premier promised it early in this session. Sir J. G. WARD .- I am asking what any honourable gentleman who now complains of this has said outside. What has he done on the platform ? An Hon. MEMBER .- None knew that this money was appropriated. Sir J. G. WARD. - Well, I say, let them go out on the platform now and do so. Mr. HUTCHESON .- I will. At least, I will condemn this Bill. Sir J. G. WARD .- I have no doubt the honourable member will. It is the easiest thing in the world to condemn anything. I have gone along a street more than once, and, looking up at magnificent piles of buildings, have thought what an easy thing it would be to pull them down. I know there are men who, when they look at such things, think that this and that can be altered ; and what damage such inen would do if they were only given the opportunity, just because they think they could do work so much better than others have done. It is easy to criticize and to pull down. It is much more difficult to design and construct. I have been referring briefly to the different points touched upon by the member for Riccarton. The honourable gentleman says it is a good job that party ties have not the same hold as formerly, and that members of the House are not marionettes. Now, since I have been in the House-that is, 
<page>1262</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1302</url>
since 1887-I have never known where the party marionettes were. The parties have all been created by the people outside of Parlia- ment, and not by those who, for personal reasons, desire to destroy them in the House. The honourable member is trying to do so now. Within my limited experience, from end to end of the colony, I have never known that parties could have been formed, or, if formed, that their ties would hold, unless they were the result of the policy as affirmed by the people, and who desired that their representatives in Parliament should on that question be united. Now, I say that in New Zealand at the 8.30. present moment, however much the honourable member may desire that there should be a weakening of party ties, I say that in this country he will have to be a very clever man who will make the members of a party forget the causes of their old party attachments. Those ties have been formed in order to give effect to great principles. I say that future political warfare in New Zealand will require policies upon both sides which will necessitate -at any rate, on our side-a policy in the general interests of the country. When the right time does arrive you may depend upon it that in future, as of yore, men will declare themselves openly under one banner or the other, and all this talk of the weakening of party ties will then be found to be visionary. You will find that any slight weakening on the part of some few members will, by the voice of the people, be rectified, and that the same good- sense will prevail amongst the people, and again amongst the members of our party, and we will find that good party administration will be as potent a factor in the future as it has been in the past. I regret exceedingly that the honourable member should have thought it desirable to give so one-sided a criticism of the policy of the Government. But for his having done so I would not have spoken. I believe that on mature consideration, if he looks back at the history of the party to which he was formerly attached and was elected to support, he will find that the Government has done its best to carry on the business of the country in a manner intended to be for the best interests of the majority of the people of the country. Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) .- There is a personal matter I wish to bring before the House. Early in the session I presented a pe- tition asking for an inquiry into the valuation of certain properties at Whangarei. A lengthy inquiry was held. The evidence was all taken down and printed. When the report was brought up in the House, the member for Auck- land City (Mr. Fowlds), who was a member of the Committee, moved that it be read, and then proceeded to make some unfair criticisms on the report and the finding of the Committee. The Premier then immediately got up and moved the adjournment of the debate, thus depriving me of the opportunity of making any reply to the unfair criticism of Mr. Fowlds, the member for Auckland City. My desire when presenting the petition was to have a full inquiry into the proceedings of the officers Sir J. G. Ward of the department, and to have the whole of that evidence printed and placed in the hands of the Government and the public, so that every landowner in the colony should know the un- fortunate position that he occupies at present in reference to the Valuation Department. Owing to the alteration that had been made in the Land- and Income tax Act of recent years the landowners now have practically no pre- tection, and are at the mercy of the officers of the department and the witnesses they employ to give evidence in the Assessment Courts. The result of that was that I had no opportunity of replying to anything or of making any expla- nation. I then immediately put the following question on the Order Paper, which has been there for the last fortnight :- "Mr. R. THOMPSON to ask the Government, What steps they intend to take to give effect to the report of the Public Petitions M to Z Committee on the petition of Robert Thompson. relative to the unequal valuation of some of his properties in Whangarei, in which the Com- mittee states that 'the valuations of some of the petitioner's properties and the great redue- tions made by the Assessment Court were strong reasons for a careful revision of all field-book valuations where inequality is evident '? " I wish to place on record the history, as short as possible, of what took place at the Assess. ment Court. The position is this : In December last the portion of my property on which I live- twenty-five acres-which, three years ago, was valued by the department at a capital value of £50 per acre and an unimproved value of $12 per acre, was raised in capital value to $110 per acre and in unimproved value to $77 per acre. Of course, I appealed, and the Assess. ment Court reduced the unimproved value from £77 to £40 per acre, after taking evidence. I am not finding any fault with the Court, but I say, where the Court has to make a reduction of £37 per acre on the unimproved value of 3 farm there must be something wrong. What I ask is for the Minister in charge of the de- partment to have an inquiry made into the whole matter as to whether the officers of the department have done their duty fairly or not. I make no complaint against the head of the department here, but, as far as its officers are concerned, I have not been fairly treated. Of course, the Court has protected me to a certain extent. In support of the valuation a land agent was brought from Auckland to give evidence, and no inspection of the property was made either by the officer of the department or by the wit- ness. Neither came to inspect the property. yet were prepared to go into the Court and give evidence on oath not only as to the capital value, but also as to the unimproved value. I think it is only right that the Government, the House, and the country should know this. be- cause if this sort of thing is allowed to go on all over the colony there is no security for any landholder. So far as I am personaly concerned the matter is over ; but in the interests of other landowners, who may find themselves any day in the same unfortu- 
<page>1263</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1303</url>
nate position, I hope the Government will take steps to see that no such abuses occur again, because, no doubt, had I been absent from home and not able to defend i Bill, which would lessen the revenue of any local myself I might as well have been put off the property altogether. In the interests of the department, and in the interests of the Govern- ment, either the law should be amended and we should go back to the conditions of 1894, by which the Government would be responsible to take over the properties at the valuation of the officers of the department, or steps should be taken to appoint valuers who have some knowledge of land-values. At the present time landowners are not protected at all, for every protection has been swept away, and they are placed entirely at the mercy of the officers of the department and the witnesses they employ. Mr. O'MEARA (Pahiatua). - I regret very much that at this late hour any members should be compelled to detain their fellow- members, more especially in view of the weary session we have had ; but, still, there are oc- casions on which duty compels us to speak in this Chamber, otherwise we might just as well remain at home with our constituents. I came here to represent my constituents, and as long as I have a grievance I shall stand up and represent it here in the House, notwith- standing the protest of the Right Hon. the Premier. I wish to speak with regard to clause 9 of the Appropriation Act, and in re- gard to the Woodville Borough Council being improperly and unfairly deprived of its subsidy on rates. This borough adopted the rating on  the unimproved value, an Act which was generally approved of not only by members of this House, but by the Government of the country ; and yet, by the fact of their adopting that Act, the Woodville Borough Council have lost revenue approximately amounting to the amount of £43. Under the rating of the old Act a rate of 1s. 3d. in the pound was struck, which brought in a revenue of £600 odd. But in order to comply with the rating on unimproved value so as to bring in a similar revenue, a rate of 3gd. was struck, and, instead of the usual subsidy of $110, they only received two - thirds of that amount. In the first year. it was deducted, and was afterwards remitted by the Govern- ment. In the second year a similar circum- stance occurred, and in the third year they granted a subsidy without any reduction at all. But, strange to say, in the fourth year the Go- vernment retained from the borough the sum of $42, and by the Government treating boroughs that adopted the rating on unimproved value in that manner I consider they have done them an injustice. The effect of the Government doing that is a deterrent to any borough or county adopting the Rating on the Unimproved Value Act. I hope the Premier will reconsider the importance of this matter, and will deal out justice to boroughs that have adopted the rating on the unimproved value. I hope that, instead of deducting the sum I have stated from the Woodville Borough, he will at once give his ! he was going to claim credit for the amended sanction and authority to have the amount re- mitted. That is the only reason for my rising at this late stage to protest against such a clause being introduced into the Appropriation body that adopted the Rating on the Unim- proved Value Act. Mr. SEDDON (Premier). - This has been a most remarkable session, and I am delighted we have come within sight of "Chicago "; and, if I may allude to the members as I see them on the benches, one and all must come to the con- clusion they will arrive there in a pretty sound state, notwithstanding the nineteen weeks and a half we have been here. Sir, the criticism we have had with respect to the Appropriation Bill, to my mind, shows that whilst there have been statements made which have not been in accord- ance with the facts, still there has not been that rancour that I have noticed in previous sessions at the conclusion of the sessional work. First of all, I wish to reply to the statement made by the member for Riccarton as to there being anxiety as regards our financial position. I may at once relieve that honourable gentle- man's anxiety. It is quite true that our expen- diture this year is extraordinarily high, but there are reasons for it which are well within the knowledge of the honourable member. What ought to weigh with him and other honourable members is that, although there has been this abnormal expenditure, we are still in a position to more than pay our way. I am satisfied we shall this year have a surplus of about a quarter of a million. The results for the past seven months of the year justify that belief, and we have the best five revenue-producing months still to run. We have £100,000 to the good, although our calculations of revenue for this year are below that of last year. Next year, 1902, if we make no further reduction in reve- nue, there must be over half a million surplus, because the abnormal expenditure which has been caused this year will not recur. To have attained such a position, while making reduc- tions in railway rates and reductions in taxa- tion of nearly $300,000 last year, and this year to have over £200,000 over normal expenditure, and a surplus, is a position which should re- lieve the honourable member of his anxiety. If not, the honourable member is a pessimist of the first water. Then, again, members must take some responsibility for the increased ex- penditure, and I was surprised at the honour- able member twitting my colleague the Minis- ter for Railways in respect to the increased railway expenditure. The honourable member himself did what he could to increase that ex- penditure. Will he say that they should take from these railway men the extra 6d. a day we gave them. It comes with an ill-grace, I think, for the honourable member for Riccarton to draw attention to the increased railway ex- penditure. What has the honourable member been doing this session ? After my colleague had announced that we were bringing in a Railway Classification Bill, which would mean increased expenditure, the honourable member appeared very impatient, and it looked as if 
<page>1264</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1304</url>
increased expenditure. Now the honourable member finds fault with the increase, and has grave anxiety as to the financial position. 1 may say at once there is no foundation for the statement in regard to unpaid troopers. Some of the officers from South Africa brought Im perial money and paid their men out of that fund, and, consequently, nothing passed through our books at all. For instance, Jackson paid his men ; and we know little of the details We paid the difference between the Imperial pay and what we pay in the colony in respect to the First, Second, and Third Contingents. At all events, the delay as to payment was no fault of ours. In the first place, when leaving South Africa there was no way of ascer- taining what was due to the troopers, with the exception of the Fourth and Fifth Contingents, who brought their pay-sheets with them. How- ever, I can only say, so far as the Government are concerned, that we have advanced moneys to these men, and in some instances have paid them more than we owe them. Then, the honour- able member complained of the growth of the de- fence expenditure. Well, of that, €92,000 is for rifles, and I say the country must have a supply of modern weapons. I hat has been pressed upon the Government in season and out of season, in addition to a desire to increase the number of Volunteer corps. I say it is nonsensical in the extreme to now find fault . ith the Govern- ment on account of the increased expenditure. We must do it, and I believe it is the desire of every well wisher of the colony to keep the  country in a strong and safe position of defence. I have had very severe criticism because of this increased defence expenditure, and I felt rather hurt, because we have had our harbour de- fences in an incomplete state for years, and we have had our Volunteers armed with obsolete weapons. When this was brought under the notice of the Government we asked Parliament for appropriations, and Parliament the year before gave a very large appropriation for de- fence ; but the money could not be spent, because we could not get big guns, batteries, and rifles. Of the large expenditure this year, nearly £100,000 is a revote of the unspent moneys of last year, and this is the first time the fact has been stated to the House. Mr. R. THOMPSON .- Are they able to sup- ply your orders this year ? Mr. SEDDON. - No; I believe we will not be able to get the big guns and one of the batteries this year. At all events, I anticipate my De- fence vote next year will be very much less than it is this year, and there will be a gradual taper- ing off in the future. I think this is necessary, because we cannot afford to go on with the heavy expenditure on defence that has been in- curred during the last few years. I now come to the Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act. It is impossible to do anything this year, and I think we may as well let things go on as they are until we know the mind of the coun- try and the position of the law. The trouble has been more with the insurance agents than with the law. However, I am pre- Mr. Seddon ner that will be satisfactory to everybody. As for the Crown tenants' rebate, I 9.0. wish to say that is no defect of the law-it is the administration of the law, and the Government intend to see that there is a compliance with the law by those who ad- minister it. The administration in Canterbury, where everybody gets relief, is the outcome of a wrong interpretation of the law, and the new Commissioner who is going there will be told that the Government want the law interpreted in the proper manner. The other Commis- sioners, who give no rebate at all, will also be told to carry out the law in the way in which it was intended to apply. As for relief to the back-block settlers, I think all I require to say is that we have the Land Bill before us, and I am prepared even now to take up that Bill and put it through. If we did so, however, we should be accused of taking advantage of the absence of those who had returned to their homes. I wish now to point out to the mem- ber for Riccarton how inconsistent he has been, and to tell him that people who live in glass houses should not throw stones. He said the Federation Commissioners drew large sums in excess of the amount allowed to them under the Disqualiication Act. Well, it is true we gave some of these Commissioners £2 2s. a day during the time they were in Australia. That sum comes to £460. It is true too, that, spread over all the members of the House on the Commission, this gave them the large sum of £88 each. Well, now, the honourable member for Riccarton has himself drawn from the State £150 in one year, and he is not within the Disqualification Act. It seems, then, it is a case of one law for one member and another law for another. I admit the honourable gentleman has, as a newspaper pro- prietor, given value for that money, but at the same time he has had an advantage over other members ; and, that being the case, he should be the last to draw attention to the matter when these members gave their services, as they did in this case, in a way that reflected greatly to their credit. Sir, I would ask that members should have some little consideration for others. The honourable member for Hawke's Bay does not want the money. He did not want the Government to put it on the estimates, but out of consideration for others he did not protest. It seems to me, Sir, that while they were in Australia the Commissioners must have been out of pocket, and this is really only a reconp- ment of expenses. To state that it is rewarding them for services is certainly a wrong thing to say. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- I did not say that. Mr. SEDDON. You said they were being rewarded, and I say it is no reward to recoup men for money they are out of pocket. I ain sorry to see the member for Ashley is not in the House. I have something to say to bin to conclude the little difference of opinion we have had respecting the Glentui Estate. I wish members to note this: First of all. be wrote to the Assets Board for correspondence, 
<page>1265</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1305</url>
He has had that correspondence for some days. He did not submit it to the House when he received it. . Now, some time ago he asked me to get the Assets Board to lay that correspondence on the table ; and I said if he wrote a letter and asked that it should be done, I would be glad to do so; but when he had that correspondence in his possession he did not lay it on the table, and I will tell the House why. He commenced his correspondence this morning by reading a letter of the 8th April. That letter, however, is not the first of the correspondence. He omitted altogether this letter of the 19th October, 1897. Now, I want members to mark how he commences this letter. He says there is public inquiry, and that the land is wanted for the public. The letter says .- "Wellington, 19th October, 1897. "SIR, - There is considerable inquiry in North Canterbury as to the intention of your Board to offer for sale, or on terms, portion of the Glentui Estate. I have just received a letter from a gentleman living in the Oxford district who is anxious to obtain a section of land for his sons, but no land at present in that district is under offer. Wool and mutton have been, and are, selling at fairly remunerative prices, hence the desire on the part of the public for the acquisition of land. In case of a lull in the market for mutton and wool, there must inevitably follow a depreciation in value of land. "I beg to suggest that your Board should  place the Glentui Estate in part or in whole in the market at the earliest possible date. If the best portions of Glentui were subdivided into sections of from 150 to 500 acres, I am con- vinced there would be a ready market at satis- factory prices to your Board. I should be pleased to be advised by your Board of your intentions to act on my suggestion .- Yours, "R. MEREDITH, M.H.R., Ashley. &c .. "The Chairman, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington." Well now, he deliberately, whilst this letter was given to him, leaves it out of the corre- spondence which he told the House he was placing before it. And. mark you, he wanted the land for the public, and said that for farms of from 150 to 500 acres there would be a demand. Then, the honourable member told the House to-day that he never applied for 1,500 acres, and he read a subsequent letter in which he mentions " 1,000 acres." But when he says he never applied for 1,500 acres he is condemned by his own letter. Here it is :- " Tullamere, Springbank, 8th April, 1898. "SIR,-Will you be good enough to inform me if your Board will sell me from 500 acres to 1,500 acres of the Glentui Run, partly pastoral and partly agricultural? I am aware that towards the close of last session of Parlia ment you signified vour intention of having the Glentui property cut up and offered for sale by November of the present year; I there- fore anticipate your subdivision by approach- give me full particulars as to locality, acreage, price, &c. - Yours, &c., "R. MEREDITH. " The Chairman, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington." Now, an honourable member who will stand up in his place in the House and say he never offered for 1,500 acres in the face of that letter -well, I can only say you must discount any statement he may make. The honourable member's forgetfulness is peculiar, seeing he had this letter in his hand at the time. As a member of the Board, I was furnished with the same correspondence as the honourable gentle- man. But there is something else the honour- able member has not told the House which I will tell it. There is, under his hand, a little note in which he, so I am told, said he did not want his name to be disclosed. He has not told the House that; nor bas he told the House of the candid views he gave the General Manager in the streets of Wellington, because Mr. Foster did not concur in letting Mr. Mere- dith have the land at the price offered. An Hon. MEMBER .- Was that Foster ? Mr. SEDDON .- Yes, Mr. Foster, the man- ager ; and Mr. Meredith said that he had made a fair offer for it ; that it ought to have been accepted, and that the refusal was a very serious matter ; that he would bring up the Board's action-and he did commence making it warm for the Board. He asked questions, and brought the Board's administration before the House, and at last it grew so had that the member for Wakatipu had to challenge the honouralle member to accept the challenge and give prac- tically what I gave the other day. Now, the honourable member to-day, very astutely, in his letter-and I hope whoever reads those letters will see this-the honourable member tells you that the land is stony. Here is a description of the land in one of his communications,- " (1.) That portion of the estate extending from the Ashley Gorge Bridge, and bounded on the north by the main road, on the cast by the road running from the said main road to the Ashley River, and on the south and west by the River Ashley, containing about 500 acres, and marked on the enclosed map (' No. 1A') in red. This block has had some surface-sowing of cocksfoot, varies very much in quality, being patchy, some fair land, including about forty acres of swamp, with stony flats containing large boulders predominating largely, covered with gorse, broom, and couch ; all the fences out of repair ; purely sheep country." An Hon. MEMBER. - Not bad land at 15s. an acre from that description. Mr. SEDDON. - I am going to give you later on the price which this sheep country brought at auction, and which was over #8 per acre. "(2.) We also applied for 500 acres, or any less portion, to the east of the road forming the eastern boundary of Block 1. This block varies very much in quality, from swamp land to light stony land, and is not improved other than a few drains, the swamp and the fences being in fair condition. There is a small whare 
<page>1266</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1306</url>
No. 2. Block No. 2 does not include any of the English grass paddocks. So far as I could judge not any of the land I am applying for has ever been broken up. I enclose you my map, as it enables me to define what I want." He sent the map, and on that map is indi- cated the parts of the estate containing the 1,500 acres, and the description of this stony patchy land was amusing. He then says,- "This land would suit me, as my home is situated only a few miles from the place, and I could work it for sheep in conjunction with my agricultural homestead. If convenient to you, or to one of the members of your Board, I would suggest, in case you are not conversant with the land in question, instead of leaving the valuation to an outsider, you might per- haps come and see the property yourself, and I would arrange, if necessary or desirable, to meet you." He still maintains, mark you, it was sheep country : "in conjunction with my agricul- tural homestead." This is the reply :- "Christchurch, 19th May, 1898. "DEAR SIR,-I am in receipt of your letter of 12th, and am intending to bring the matter before my Board at its next meeting, with a view to fixing reserves on the various portions of the estate. " We are having many inquiries for farms on the Glentui, and it may be that the Board will decide to adhere to its usual practice of first offering by auction. I will, however, give you early advice in reply to your inquiries .- Yours, &c., " WALTER G. FOSTER, General Manager, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington. "R. Meredith, Esq., M.H.R., Springbank." On the 19th May we told him that we were going to submit it to public competition. On the 28th May, in the face of being informed that this land was to be submitted to public competition-and you mark that he wrote in his first letter to us in October his reason for writing. His October letter was as follows : - " Wellington, 19th October, 1897. "SIR, - There is considerable inquiry in North Canterbury as to the intention of your Board to offer for sale, or on terms, portion of the Glentui Estate. I have just received a letter from a gentleman living in the Oxford district who is anxious to obtain a section of land for his son ; but no land at present in that district is under offer. Wool and mutton have been, and are, selling at fairly remunerative prices, hence the desire on the part of the public for the acquisition of land. In case of a lull in the market for mutton and wool, there must inevitably follow a depreciation in value of land. "I beg to suggest that your Board should place the Glentui Estate in part or in whole in the market at the earliest possible date. If the best portions of Glentui were subdivided into sections of from 150 to 500 acres, I am con- vinced there would be a ready market at satis- Mr. Seddon pleased to be advised by your Board of your intentions to act on my suggestion .- Yours, " R. MEREDITH, M.H.R., Ashley. &c.,  "The Chairman, Assets Realisation Board, Wellington." And, in his letter of 28th May, 1898, he says,- " In reference to my former letter applying for about a thousand acres of the Glentui free- hold and your reply to the said letter, I may state that I am now prepared to make you a definite offer for the land as described by me in my former application to purchase." His former application to purchase was for the 1,500 acres :- "I will give you the Government valuation with 5 per cent. added. I will pay you 25 per cent. cash, balance in three years at 44 per cent. per annum interest. Please give me an answer by Friday, the 3rd June next, by letter, or by wire addressed to Rangiora for me. I have another property in view in case you are not willing to negotiate with me. "R. MEREDITH." This is the reply :- "I have brought the matter of the sale of this property before my Board, and am in- structed to inform applicants that it will be surveyed at an early date and offered by auction about November next. I thank you for your inquiries and offer ; but, understanding you have expressed a wish that the public should have an opportunity of purchasing at auction, the Board has not been unmindful of your views. ## " WALTER G. FOSTER, General Manager." We did not give the honourable member what he wanted, and here is the result. Here is a little map ; here is the bridge across the river ; and here are the prices fetched at auction for this sheep country : Section 2, 56 105. per acre ; Section 3, £5 17s. 6d. per acre : Section 5. £8 2s. 6d. per acre ; Section 5A, £7 126. 6. per acre ; Section 6, €3 17s. 6d. per acre : Sec- tion 7, £7 15s. per acre ; Section 8, $5 7 .. nd per acre; and Section 10, 59 10s. per acre. This is the sheep country. The lowest section sold was $3 17s. 6d., but the average was over £6 an acre, and the difference would have gone into the pocket of Mr. Meredith-over 50(0) When I was engaged in fighting with ofer honourable members, and he interfered, it would have been best for him had he left me alone. I have no feeling in the matter. The honourable member has expressed his regret for what of- curred, and I accept it in the spirit in which it is tendered, but I hope that the next time be reads the correspondence which has taken place he will read the whole of it, and not leave out an important letter which he had in his p. In doing that he made a serious session. blunder. I suppose he did not know that I bad the same correspondence in my drawer, an- ticipating some such proceedings. The mes: important letter he never read : and it struck me that possibly an oversight might occur: but. 
<page>1267</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1307</url>
recent date, I would like to know what became of the other letter, and I know there exists a little note about his name not being disclosed to another party. If the honourable member presses for its production he will be obliged. The honourable member said he courted an in- quiry. Now, Sir, I shall be most happy to oblige him. He may name his own Magistrate, who shall go through the correspondence and over the accounts of the land that was sold, and consider the position taken up by the Board in respect to the matter and the posi- tion and action of the honourable member in respect to it, and the world shall judge. cannot say anything more clear than that. would not have brought the matter up at all, and should have treated it with silent contempt ; but when he used his position as a member of the House to bring pressure to bear on the Board, and accused the Board of not doing their duty with respect to realising the estate satisfactorily, he must take the responsibility, and as he has read part of the correspond- ence, I have completed it for him. Gene- rally at the wind-up of the session I have been able to shake hands with every member of the House. Whatever has taken place during the session, I have been able to part with mem- bers on the best of terms. I know in the heat of debate we often view matters in a different light, one from the other, but I hope that whilst we differ, we differ conscientiously, and that there shall be no personal feeling engendered. I have always managed to do that so far in my public life, and I shall endea-  vour to always do so; but when a member studiously in cold blood seeks to cast a re- flection and becomes personal I must, per- force, protect myself. And I say the member #cc-zero for Ashley next day deliberately, under the pre- text of correcting, brought up what appeared in one of the papers. When a member does that deliberately it proves vindictiveness, and having deliberately provoked he must take the consequences : there goes consequently on re- cord the statement of his peculiar attempt to obtain land cheaply-I cannot use a stronger term-I will say a desire to make a splendid bargain at the sacrifice of the Board and at the sacrifice of the honour, if I had been a weak man, of a friend and his own leader. Now, I will say this: I do not want to hold a position in this House and in the country unless in holding it I can at the same time hold up my head and defy any man to say I have been a party to that which would not bear the strictest scrutiny, and I say to have sold him the land at the price offered could not have borne scrutiny either with credit to myself or the member for Ashley. It is a good job for both of us I was a strong man, who would not be a party to sacrificing this property, which belonged to the shareholders of the Bank of New Zealand, and in which the colony is also interested, and of which I am a trustee. I maintained my integrity, and the member for Ashley became a candid friend from that time forward. Sir, I hope that these personal of my speech-there has been with some mem- bers during the session, and repeatedly, violent personal attacks upon myself. That has not been appreciated by the large majority of the members of the House ; and, when these per- sonal attacks are made upon one holding my position, it does not commend itself to the majority of the members, to the people in the colony, or to our well-wishers outside the colony. They do not appreciate it; and it recoils, in my opinion, more upon those who respect neither the position nor the man than I it does upon the man or the position. We should feel while we are here that we are I the representatives of the people, and for the sake of the people we should show forbearance and work together for the common good ; and, where personalities occur, those who send us here neither wish them nor do they respect us any the more for being parties to them. If that is borne in mind, and, what is more, if we feel we are only here for a time- and repeatedly occurrences take place which remind us we may wound and injure-then the time comes when as men we regret it. I hope, at all events, so far as I am concerned, that shall not be the case with me. I hope those who have differed from me will give me credit for having differed conscientiously. My colleagues and myself have to encounter very great difficulties ; we cannot see eye to eye with members with respect to matters of ad- ministration ; we cannot, of course, hold the same views with respect to legislation ; but I wish them clearly to understand that, whilst we differ, we differ on general principles, be- lieving the views that we hold are for the best interests of the colony ; and so far I think we may claim this credit : that our policy has been one which has promoted the well- being and the prosperity of the colony. There has not been a single experiment made to which exception can be taken or which we are asked to repeal. We have taken a step forward this session in respect to the State coal-mine. I feel as sure as I am standing here that that experiment will be a success; and to make that a success my colleagues and myself will use our best endeavours; and by doing this, and by bringing down the price of coal so as to place it within the reach of all, and by the saving to the State itself in respect to what we require for State purposes, by this time next year, and when I am in the same position of moving next year's Appropriation Bill, I hope then we shall be complimented on having successfully opened a mine or mines, and on having met success- fully what was a public necessity. Before concluding, I desire to express my pleasure and sincere hope that we may meet again. I re gret extremely that our worthy Speaker has, owing to ill-health, not been for some time in his place; and you, Sir, have had a very heavy strain placed upon you in the dual capacity in which you have been called upon to act. You have had also the able 0.30. assistance of the member for Wai- 
<page>1268</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1308</url>
of the Standing Orders, and being, perhaps, de- sirous sometimes of gettting my own way as other members are, the Chair and myself may have differed as to points of order. But that is only for the moment. We must uphold the Chair, and thus preserve order, decorum, and fair debate. To yourself, to the Chairman of Committees, and to all honourable members I express, on behalf of myself and colleagues, our very best wishes, earnestly hoping that the prosperity of the colony may continue, and that our labours for the session will be productive of good to our colony and will be in the best interests of its people. Bill read a second time. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 22 .- Extra allowance to members of the Federation Commission. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved, That "two pounds " be inserted in lieu of " one -pound." Amendment agreed to. Bill reported. On the motion, That the Bill be read a third time,- Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) .- Before you put that question, Sir, I have a few words to say. First of all, I regret to find, while we are finishing up the sessional work, that a great many of the returns which have been ordered by the House have not been laid upon the table There were a number of returns ordered on the first day of the session which should have been placed on the table of the House long ago. In the second place, the manner in which we have been hurry- ing legislation during the last few days is a scandal to Parliament. We have rushed through Bills during the last few days without sufficient consideration, and I regret that this state of things should be continued ; and I do suggest to the Ministry that, instead of delaying Bills that there is no necessity for keeping back to the last days of the session, they should bring them down in the early days, when members of the House are fresh and are ready to consider them, and to do their duty to their constituents and to the country. Then, I regret, too, that no steps have been taken by the Premier to accept the recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee and bring in a Bill to deal with the Midland Railway Company. I think it is a great pity that Parliament is finishing up without, at any rate, having placed on the statute-book a Bill that would enable the Ministry to settle this question once and for all. Especially do I say that because at the present juncture nobody can deny our needs with respect to borrowed money are consider- able, nor can anybody deny that we ought to be able to go on the London market on the most favourable conditions. That may not be so under the conditions that now exist with this Midland Railway question unsettled, and I must express my deep regret that there is no Bill on the statute- book under which the de- benture-holders and the shareholders could be satisfactorily dealt with as recommended by the Public Accounts Committee. I also want to Mr. Seddon with our public works money. We have been still more lavish with our Consolidated Fund ; and a review of the nrst part of the year leads one to have considerable doubts as to how we shall end up the twelve months. I find, for in- stance, that for the first six months of the year, in the Consolidated Fund, there has been a revenue derived of £2,648,591. The expenditure during that six months has been $3,12-,718, leaving a deficit of £480, 127. I do not wish that to go forth as what may be considered the true deficit of the Consolidated Fund, because, while we have a deficit of £480,127, there is included a transfer to the Public Works Fund of $310,000, and some debentures redeemed-£19,000. But, taking those two items, there is still a deficit of #151.127, which, I take it, is rather dis- heartening. In the corresponding period of last year we ended up with a surplus of some- thing like £60,000, whereas this year, even after making all the allowances one can make for transfers to Public Works Fund and deber- tures redeemed, we finished up with a deficit of £151,000. The balance for the first half of this year is therefore $210,000 worse than it was in the corresponding period of last year. Sir J. G. WARD .- What is the increase of revenue for the same period ? Mr. J. ALLEN .- The increase is all right enough, but, unfortunately, there is a very much larger increase in the expenditure. The revenue for the first half of last year was $2,530,208. The revenue for the first half of this year was £2,648,591, or an increase of about $118,000. But the increase in the expenditure during the first half is startling, for one finds that the expenditure for the first half of last year was $2,471,933, and the expenditure for the first half of this year, including the two items I have mentioned, is $3,128,718, or an increase of #656,785, or, deducting the two items I men ioned before, which amount to about $500,000, the increased expenditure is £156,000. Sir J. G. WARD .- There is a difference of £100,000 between you and Mr. G. W. Russell. Mr. J. ALLEN. I make my own calcu. lations. I make it £656,785 ; and if you deduet from that the amount transferred to the Pu: he Works Fund and the debentures redeemed, which amount to about $500,000, it makes an increased expenditure of #156,000. With re- gard to the Public Works Fund, I find that the receipts for the first half of last year were £635,832, and for the first half of this year they That is accountable have been £ ,311,308 from the fact that a million of loan-money has been raised for the first half of this current year ; but that particular balance-sheet is not of great interest, except so far as it discloses that all the borrowed money up to that date had been raised. But what is startling is the difference in the expenditure between the first half of last year and the first half of this year. Last year the expendi- ture was #404,746 and this year $1,191,425, or an increase of somewhere about £136.679. I know a great deal of that is due to the fact 
<page>1269</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1309</url>
came up for payment during the first part of this year, and it is quite likely that during the succeeding half the expenditure would be very much less than it was in the second half of last year. But, Sir, we are placed face to face with this fact: that at the six months we had available of loan-money and of balances -including the balance available still from the Consolidated Fund, which amounts to £190,0 0, new loan £1,250,000, and balance at the 30th September of #352 399 a total of available money at six months' time of £1,792,399. Well, it seems a tolerably large amount available, but when one looks at the Appropriation Bill and the amount that has been appropriated for public-works expendi- ture, and looks especially at the column which authorises the Government to enter into lia- bilities beyond the appropriation I refer to column 9 of the Fourth Schedule, where autho- rity is given to enter into liabilities of close upon £1,000,000 - £929,000 - one begins to wonder again where we shall finish up on the 31st March next, and whether we shall have ways and means to meet our liabilities. On the 31st March last we were unfortunate enough to finish up in this position : that, taking all the liabilities into account that had been incurred by the Crown, we had not ways and means under the Public Works Fund to meet them. Now, the Premier met that by saying that he had another half-million in the Consolidated Fund which he could transfer ; but at the time be said that he had no authority to transfer it to the Public  Works Fund. I do not think he could say now, at any rate, that at the end of the cur- rent year he will have half a million to trans fer from the Consolidated Fund to the Public Works Fund. #cc-zero Mr. SEDDON .- I will have a quarter of a million. Mr. J. ALLEN .- I certainly hope the Pre- mier may, in the interests of the colony ; but, even if he has a quarter of a million, it seems to me we are running our finance too close now to be sound. I do not mean to say that our expenditure is going to exceed our ways and means, but unless great care is taken I venture to say there is a great probability of our having incurred liabilities for which we have no avail- able moneys in our ways and means. I think it is to be deprecated that, even in regard to liabilities or contracts that have been entered into, the colony should en'er into them not having provided some means of securing moneys to meet these liabilities. I do not think we ought to exceed our ways and means in that direction, and I hope the ill perpetrated last year in so doing will not occur again on the 31st March next. Sir, I have no more to say. Although one would have liked to have a good deal more to say on this Appropriation Act, I am aware that members are all desirous of finishing up, and therefore I will not de- tain them any longer. Sir J. G. WARD (Colonial Secretary) .- I do not want to take up the time of the House at any length. If the honourable member had been place in connection with financial matters, he would have heard my reply to the speech of the member for Riccarton-and I personally dealt with those matters now referred to by the mem- ber for Bruce, while the Right Hon. the Pre- mier covered a good deal more ground than I did in the same direction-he would have found, by the statement he now makes and that made by the honourable mem' er for Riccarton; that the difference between the figures of the honour- able gentleman and the member for Riccarton regarding the estimated deficiency is about £100,000. The honourable member for Ric- carton made the deficiency £328,000 for the half-year, and the honourable gentleman makes it, in round figures, #150,000. Mr. J. ALLEN .- What do you get ? Sir J. G. WARD. - I think that the honour- able member's figures are not very far out. I think they are fairly accurate ; but we require to take into consideration in connection with these matters the fact, which the honourable member appears to have overlooked, that our re- venue shows an increase up to date this year of £118,243. That increase is a most important factor. Had we a falling revenue, then there would be some reason to be afraid, but that element should fill us with hope and encourage- ment. In addition to that, I cannot but refer to another important feature in the finance of last year which is also a significant factor in dealing with this matter - namely, that £300,000 per annum in the shape of taxation was re- mitted to the people of the colony ; and when we know from the Colonial Treasurer that he contemplates this year, judging from the re- turns to hand, having a quarter of a mil- lion surplus to pay into the Public Works Fund from the Consolidated Fund, I say that, even though the expenditure has increased abnormally-and it is largely upon non-recur- ring items there is no tangible ground for taking a pessimistic view of the future. There is, I repeat, no ground whatever for any fear as to the future position of the affairs of the country. Prudence in its management will be required, and also, I venture to reaffirm, some- thing like vigour and a little boldness in carry- ing on its affairs, both of which, I am sure, are elements that are not wanting on our side. The Opposition, we know, is able to introduce a vast amount of talk and of criticism. That is their stock-in-trade. Policy they have none. I be- lieve I am right in saying that this is the most talkative House the country has ever seen, and the Ministers find themselves, nine times out of ten, when it is desirable they should talk, compeiled to make up their minds to sit quiet, in order to allow the outpourings of honourable members who are criticizing us to go on in their sweet uninterrupted way. An Hon. MEMBER .- The honourable member for Rangitikei, for instance. Sir J. G. WARD .-- No; the honourable mem- ber for Rangitikei (Mr. Lethbridge) has not been very talkative ; but this must be said of the honourable gentleman : that whenever he does talk he talks common-sense, and for that. 
<page>1270</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1310</url>
singling him out very conspicuously from the honourable members who surround him ; and I must make an exception in this respect of the honourable member for Wakatipu also. I want for the moment to refer to the returns alluded to by the honourable member for Bruce, who says that the Government have not furnished the returns asked for by the House. I do not know if the honourable gentleman is aware how many returns have been asked for from the Government this session. Mr. ALLEN .- Forty-five not supplied. Sir J. G. WARD .- The honourable member is wrong. The number of returns asked for is ninety-two, and the number that has actually been supplied is sixty-two. Of the returns mentioned in the question on the Order Paper given notice of by the honourable member for Bruce there are not less than seventeen that have since been supplied. I wish to say this also ; that there has been no attempt what- ever on the part of the Government to stop any single return asked for by honourable members. We have not given the slightest indication to any officer to hold back or to delay any return, but, on the contrary, our desire has been that all the returns should be furnished to the House. I cannot, however, do other than carry my mind back to about a fortnight ago, when I received a written memorandum sent to me by the head of a department under my control, stating that it would take twelve months or more to prepare one return that was asked for by the honourable member for Bruce, and it  would involve between two and three solid months of typewriting before it could be fur- nished to the House. An Hon. MEMBER. - Which return was that ? Sir J. G. WARD .- I think it is a return re- lative to the divisional cost of laying sleepers, rails, and other matters connected with the Railways. I merely refer to what responsible officers have advised me; and when depart- ments are going at high pressure, as they are during the session, and such a tremendous amount of information is sought for, it is im- possible, with the ordinary work of the depart- ments, for it to be supplied at short notice ; but I believe myself the departments in every instance do their best to furnish information. But the fact that every return is not furnished with railroad speed is not to be put as a sin of omission to the door of the Ministry, for there is not the slightest desire on the part of Minis- ters to withhold information. Wherever it has been possible for us to give information we have given it very readily. In looking at the work that has been carried out during the session by the House, I am not far out in stating that a vast amount of work has been done in the direction I have re- ferred to. The returns which have been put on record themselves disclose the fact that an immense amount of work of a detail character has been done by the various departments, and I say that the honourable member for Bruce and others should be reasonable. When I look Sir J. G. Ward to Ministers, and when I consider the fact that. apart from House work, we have had to ad- minister our departments, and the long hours that have been worked, notwithstanding that at the early part of the session early-rising hours were observed, I cannot get over the fact, nor can any fair critic, that a tremendous amount of work has been put in by Ministers. I am satisfied that the financial position of the colony is reassuring, and that there is nothing whatever to warrant fear in the way that is predicted by those most strongly opposing the policy of the Government. I recognise that care is as necessary to-day as it ever was, and it need not be assumed by any one that Ministers are not fully alive to their great re- sponsibilities. We will do our best to steer the colony in the right and sure course. Mr. LAWRY (Parnell) .- Without reflecting upon you at all, Sir, in your discharge of the duties of the chair, I desire to express the hope that Sir Maurice O'Rorke will be able to come back next session restored to health. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- My reply on the third reading of the Appropriation Bill will be brief and to the point. I must say that, as regards the remarks on the third reading, there is nothing I can reasonably take ex- ception to. Honourable members will differ from each other on matters in general, and there is no question, I think, on which we have differed or will differ so much as the one of finance. I will at once say that the member for Bruce takes a very pessimistic view of the situation, but I think he must admit this : that, taking the figures he has given us 35 being correct, and with the abnormal expend .. ture during the first six months of the year with the succeeding six months, which are the best revenue-producing six months-taking the debit balance mentioned by the honourable member, that will be more than wiped off during the next five months, and leave us with a credit balance of over a quarter of a million. I do not myself take and never have taken an optimistic view in respect to our finance, and 1 have erred, I think, on the side of caution : but I will say this to the honourable member : that last year, in reduction of railway charges, in direct taxation, and otherwise, we gave relief to the er- tent of a quarter of a million of money-very nearly $300,000; and then this year we hive the abnormal expenditure of over a quarter of a million. You have therefore a difference ci half a million of money. We have thus, with the abnormal expenditure, and what we have given away, over half a million ; yet with that our accounts have balanced, and we have some thing to the good. Mr. J. ALLEN. - Your railway revende b more. Mr. SEDDON .- Yes, but still we have givea away concessions. If we had retained er Customs and our railway charges as they were we would have had $300,000 more money. . come now to the question of the returns it? honourable member complained of. One them is the B .- 1 paper-the Public Accetta 
<page>1271</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1311</url>
table, and no one on the opposite side appears threatened the Government; and the names to have seen it. applied to myself-why I had a paper the other An Hon. MEMBER. - When was it put day which was sent from Home, and the language it contained would not be allowed there ? Mr. SEDDON .- I put it on the table, and in this House. I read that paper, and I said, "This is not the way to get much from the gentlemen opposite do not seem to trouble Premier or the colony." themselves a fig about it. They told us they could not understand the finances of the colony without it, and yet they are going home with- language if it would not have been allowed here. out even looking at that celebrated B .- 1. Mr. W. FRASER .- It was not there two paragraph was modest as compared therewith. days ago. Mr. SEDDON .- Oh ; the honourable mem- At all events, I have said this: that the Go- ber has not made inquiries. vernment have acted in deference to the report Mr. W. FRASER .- I heard the honourable of the Public Accounts Committee, and in deference to what was the opinion of the Com- gentleman ask his Secretary to put it on the mission which was appointed. So far as the table two days ago. Mr. SEDDON .- My Secretary could not lay Government is concerned, we have nothing to it on the table. Why, B .- 1 has not been regret. Many years ago, when a Bill was pro- mentioned on that side of the House for the posed to give #618,000 in the way of debentures in lieu of land, I asked the House to carry that; last six weeks; and on this Bill, when members and it was objected to at that time by, I think, have the opportunity of referring to the return, they leave it alone-not one of them has Sir Robert Stout and others, and that proposal referred to it. However, I recognise that the Opposition is not an organized Opposition, and they do not want to make things unpleasant an accomplished fact. for the Government. The honourable member also took exception to there being no Blll brought in in connection with the Midland the land-value into debentures or cash was the right thing to have done at the time, and Railway Company debenture-holders. Well, if any one had told me a week ago that the honourable member for Bruce wanted a Bill of Twelve years have now passed, and blocks of the kind, I should have doubted it very much, land in Canterbury, Westland, and Nelson have owing to the action he took on the Public Accounts Committee. He was one of those  law, and after the colony has been injured who objected to it. Mr. FISHER .- No; he was betwixt and otherwise-and you wind it up by giving between. Mr. SEDDON .- Well, at all events, he has been convinced and converted, and is now an ardent supporter. In this matter I have heard have got it. one member saying that unless something is done by the colony for the company it will be a case of " Get you gone ; get more honest men " ; right. I wound up a speech then, and I said and another says the bondholders have laboured under an injustice, and that they must be treated fairly. Now, I have been watching the position narrowly, and with the desire to do what was known as the B1 value, and, as we had said that it was worth £618,000, to simply what was just. The feeling to do something say, " We will give you debentures in lieu of for the debenture-holders and shareholders has come along gradually and slowly, and at last and that the land was of the value we assessed it reached a majority of the Public Accounts Committee, and the one member who was not overshadowed was the honourable member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher). But I was a little bit surprised this afternoon that he too was anxious that something should be done for the debenture-holders, and that this Mid- land Railway question should be dealt with and the debenture-holders. In conclusion, I once and for all. The question is this: We say those who were in the Ministry when the certainly have come to the conclusion that this project was first mooted and who entered into gift shall be offered. I am not so sure, if it is offered now, whether the parties will accept it in the spirit intended, and be satisfied. Time helps in these matters, and no great harm will the result that subsequently it has gone on result by holding it over until next year. I believe they will appreciate it much more, having had time to reflect on what they have An Hon. MEMBER .- It must have been strong Mr. SEDDON. - Why, the "mailed fist " was defeated. If that proposal had been carried we would have had the Midland Railway to-day An Hon. MEMBER .- Never. Mr. SEDDON .- I say, Yes; and, changing the railway would now have been finished. been locked up, and we ultimately wind up, after thousands of pounds have been wasted in £130,000. Mr. FISHER .- Who stopped that ? Mr. SEDDON .- Sir Robert Stout. Mr. FISHER. - That is right. Now you Mr. SEDDON .- Those who were with the Government at that time, and myself, were that the honour of the colony was at stake. We had said that the land-value was worth the land," would have proved our sincerity, it at. We were giving them in land full value, and were asking Parliament to give them cash or debentures equal to the land, and I said that the honour of the colony was at stake, and we ought to make that good. Of course, another colour has been put on those remarks of mine when it suited the company the first contract must take the responsibility. The proposals we made to give the £618,000 in debentures in lieu of land were defeated, with from law-court to law-court, and it has put the whole of the districts interested seven or 
<page>1272</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1312</url>
going on very slowly. So far as Canterbury is concerned it has a right to have this connec- tion. Whereas other parts of the colony are having large sums lavished on them from the Public Works Fund, Canterbury prac- tically gets nothing at all. The lands have been sacrificed, and have been locked up for all these years. I am surprised at the Canterbury members. If I was off these benches-if I was a member and not a Minister-I would know the reason why. We want to have the line completed, and bring the line up to the Cass on the Springfield end. Members will see that we are compared with other districts and main trunk lines not going quite fast enough, and they should take a share of the responsi- bility. It is during the session that Ministers are always pressed for expenditure ; but, as 1 have said, we must be moderate in our expen- diture, and it is the intention of the Govern- ment to ease off the expenditure. An Hon. MEMBER. - Metal our 1.0. roads. Mr. SEDDON. - As far as metalling the roads in the summer time is concerned, it costs twice as much as during the winter; in fact, you lose a good deal of the metal I want members to realise they must take their fair share of responsibility. It is unfair for mem- bers to press on the Ministry all this expendi- ture, and then, when we have expended the money at their request, turning round and telling us we are galloping to a deficit. The honourable member for Bruce is as bad as the  rest. Why, Sir, of course, I know nothing about the estimates myself. Hon. MEMBERS .- Oh ! Mr. SEDDON. - I see them when they are printed. Members will have noticed the dis- consolate face of my colleague the Minister of Lands last week. He came to me with about £200,000 for roads on the supplementary esti- mates, and I had to say, "That will never do. I have only £325,000 left of the loan- moneys." Then, of course, he cut them down to £100,000, and he said, from what members had said to him, it would be a moral impos- sibility for him to do with anything less ; " In fact," he said, " I have promised this." I then said, " You must break that promise to the ex- tent of two-thirds ; ₺32,000 is all you can get." Now, I believe that £32,000 has not given general satisfaction, but I want honourable members to know I am not responsible. I do not know what the allocations are. I do not know the particular works. It is not the duty of the Colonial Treasurer. It is his duty to find the moneys, and he has to find out what are reasonable requirements, then to ob- tain his ways and means, and then he gives to the other Ministers the distribution of the par- ticular amounts. I will conclude my few remarks on this by saying that the position, as far as the Opposition and the Government are concerned - or, rather, the members on this side of the House-has been unique. First of all, we had an announcement made by the honour- able member for Hawke's Bay that he was not Mr. Seddon did not say so in the House last session, although he told me personally-but this time he made the announcement that there was no leader of the Opposition. Mr. FISHER .- Still you termed him the leader of the Opposition. He was like clay in the hands of the potter. Mr. SEDDON .- I do not think so. At all events, the position has been as I have ex- plained. When we wanted to fix the order of business in measures of policy, we have had this situation : depending on the support of members of the Opposition-at least, those who formerly belonged to the Opposition - and though their arguments suggested that they would vote with us, we found they voted against us just the same as before; and one of the results has been that some members of our side of the House have taken pity on those members, and have shown them the different points where the Government was assailable. And, Sir, I have been surprised, when their services have been voluntanly offered, that, instead of being accepted in the spirit intended, members on that side have taken umbrage and said, "Oh, no; there are four or five on these benches, and each of us considers he is going to be leader. We are not going to have Government supporters helping us, and we refuse help from such a source. And we resent it, and we will not go into the lobby with Mr. Fisher, the member for Wel- lington City." Mr. FISHER .- But there is much in your story. Mr. SEDDON .- Then, Sir, it has had an- other development. It has developed some candid friends. Now, if there is one thing in our political life that I do detest it is the candid friend-the friend who is ever watching over your interests, who professes a deep concern for your welfare ; but whenever he can, and as fast as he can, if I may say it, politically cuts your throat. These candid friends are not at all respected by members of the Opposition side of the House, nor are they esteemed by members on this side. Still, they are there, and, as I have said -- not here of course, because it would not be permitted here-but as I have said about the fly in amber, one wonders how they ?: there. However, we survive all that. The work of the session when it comes to be sum- marised and fairly inquired into, will show that we have placed upon our statute-book this session measures which are of great importance for the good of our colony. I will not weary members by mentioning the various Acts. but I may say that the Factories Act, thai was passed yesterday, is in the intere-ts of the great body of the workers of this country. It is a great improvement on the existing las. and in respect to many industries that are in- jurious to health it enforces considerations trai were previously denied. It also protects the youths. It has not gone as far as I should like it in respect to boys, but at all events those be low eighteen have protection now that hitberto did not exist. Then, as regards women and 
<page>1273</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1313</url>
in the Act of 18:4, and which, from 1894 to put through its Committee stage, there was not a single " No" against the third reading of the 1901-for seven years-has been resisted in Par- measure. It was carried unanimously by the liament by one means or another, and has been subordinated by interested parties. At last, House. And then we had a spectacle I never however, we have it on the statute-book of the witnessed before in the House, and hope never colony. In the woollen factories women and to witness again. I do not wish to say any- thing that will cause heartburning, but I no- girls now, of course, can work their forty-eight ticed in the Press something in this style : hours, but all girls under eighteen years of age are now only permitted to work forty-five hours. " A gallant band of heroes set up a stonewall, I therefore say that, under all the circum- and did their level best to prevent the passing of the measure." What a travesty on the true stances, I congratulate the House and mem- position ; they were not opposing the hill at bers upon the work done. There are some measures which I regret have not been placed all; they wanted it passed. Sir, what were the heroes doing ? They were engaged in a on the statute-book. I allude to the Licensing struggle to save themselves from having to write Act Amendment Bill. I regret that that ques- to the Paymaster-General, "We do not want tion has not been dealt with, but the fault lies the increase." with those who flooded the Order Paper with amendments. The representatives of the Pro- stonewall ; it was not the Bill at all. Members told the House and the country on the second hibitionist section - what have they done, after going on the platform and denouncing the Go- reading " We are opposed to it until it goes before the constituencies : we will not soil our vernment ? After strongly asserting that there fingers with dross obtained at the end of the must necessarily be some alteration in the way session : we will not pollute our pockets with of amending licensing laws, when we gave them money obtained under such circumstances : our the opportunity for making amendments they constituents must be consulted; it is uncon- flooded the Order Paper and threatened stone- stitutional and unprecedented to do this." walling and obstruction to such an extent that But, when called upon to put in a proviso to, in the Government, fearing that other measures that were necessary would be blocked, have had effect, tell the House and country that " Having in the House stated I was not in favour of to allow that matter to stand over till next this money being paid until after next ses- session. The Counties Bill is another measure I should like to see on the statute-book, but it sion of Parliament, I notify the Paymaster that I do not wish to receive the increase" is impossible. I sent it to a Committee, and -why, Sir, rather than be put in the position found the Committee absolutely opposed to the of giving effect to their own opinions as ex- policy contained in the Bill. They struck pressed, and as they told the country were the out every cardinal point of the Bill which I believe the people of the country desire. views they held, they stonewalled the Kill for a solid day and night, and they managed to get The general feeling is that there is too much out of the difficulty, and members know the government, and I say the fact that we have rest. That measure has put upon the colony Road Boards with a paltry revenue of $100 a about $6,000, which is scattered over 800,000 year by the score in the colony points to the people; and I will say this, that the people necessity for reduction. The Bill was kept of New Zealand, if you give them bene- before the Committee for a long time, and the ficent laws, and if you watch carefully their draftsman had not time to remodel it ; and to interes's, and the country is main ained pro- have brought in the Bill in its mangled shape sperous, will never, in my opinion, have a word would have been only to waste the time of the to say against the increase in salaries that are House. But next session I will take a lead paid to members the people believe in pay- from the House itself. I shall ask the House ing a living-wage. One of the rules at the to decide finally on the policy as to whether present time is that each one shall receive a there is to be a reduction of the number of living-wage-that each one shall be rewarded local bodies, whether there are to be Town for the services he renders. It is the position, Boards and Road Boards, or whether it will be no' the individual, that the salary is given for, necessary to do away with some Road Boards and i is the position of the member of the day. and increase the number of counties, but He is only a passing event-whoever comes making them much smaller than proposed in and takes his place, there is the position, and the Bill. I know now pretty well the mind of there is the salary. The ques ion is, Is £300 the House on this question, and I will endea- equal to the position ? I say i is. The vour to have a Bill ready next session that will amount paid before was not equal to the enable us to grapple with the question and position, and as far as members were con- complete this necessary work in the present cerned it left them year to year making great Parliament. I also wish to put on record sacrifices for the people of the country, which some remarks in regard to a matter that sacrifices, I say, were not necessary. I con- personally affects the House in respect to clude, Sir, by expressing the hope, as stated the Payment of Members Bill. I say that by the honourable member for Parnell, bat 90 per cent. of the members of the House were our Speaker, Sir Maurice O'Rorke, will be in favour of that measure, but there are a few res ored to perfect heal h, and tha he may who are nervous, and feared the consequences. be with us next session. You, Sir, for pre- They had not mentioned the matter to their siding during the session, I, with other mem- constituents and they hesitated about the Bill ; That was the reason of the 
<page>1274</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1314</url>
bers, trust we may see you back in good health, and that during the recess you may enjoy every blessing that is given to man. Of our worthy Acting Chairman of Committees, he has had a most difficult time during these long hours, and sometimes members-of course, I never sin myself in that direction-but some members have thought that in some of his rulings he was too severe. At all events, Sir, I may say this: that the session has been tedious. At one time I thought the record would not be a satisfactory one ; but on going through the Bills passed and the business that has been performed, I say that the session of 1901 has been one of the most profitable sessions of the Parliament of New Zealand. To members I say, speaking for the Government, we have had our trials, and I wish members clearly to under- stand this: although there has been a differ- ence of opinion, our earnest desire has been to promote the wellbeing of the country, and give hope and expectation to its people. To one and all in the House I say I hope they will return to their homes, take their constituents into their confidence, and fairly and imparti- ally lay the work of the session before them, and I am sure that nothing will be found fault with. Bill read a third time. PARLIAMENTARY SESSION, 1902. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) wished to ask the Premier a question without notice. There was a vote on the estimates to enable the Premier to proceed to the Coronation in June next. He would like to know what arrangements had been made about the meeting of Parliament next year. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said that, as far as the Government saw, there would be no neces- sity for any alteration next year. It had been suggested that an early session should be held, but members did not seem to fall in with the view ; and he was satisfied that if he did go Home on that auspicious occasion his colleagues would be well able to satisfactorily carry on the business of the country. When he returned he trusted that his services would tend to the ad- vancement of the country and the good of all. ## BUSINESS OF THE SESSION. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER laid on the table the following schedule of the business trans- acted during the session :- 1\. SELECT COMMITTEES- On public matters On Private Bills ... 2\. PUBLIC BILLS- Received the Royal assent Reserved for the signification of His Majesty's pleasure Dropped, or otherwise disposed of 3\. PRIVATE BILLS- Received the Royal assent Dropped ... .. 4\. PETITIONS PRESENTED- From Europeaus 1,222 .. From Maoris ... ... ... Mr. Seddon 5. Divisions- In the whole House 71 In Committee 144 .. 215 - 6. SITTINGS- Days of meeting 77 ... Hours of sitting- Before midnight 518 h. 23 m. ... After midnight 116 h. 1 m. ... 631 h. 24 m :. Daily average 8 h. 14 m. ... 7\. VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS- Questions asked of Ministers Entries in Journals ... 1,150 --- 1.95 Daily average ... 8\. ORDERS FOR PAPERS 00 ... ... ... 9. PAPERS LAID UPON THE TABLE- By command 86 .. In return to Orders 62 In return to Addresses 0 By Message 0 ... ... By Act 110 .. ... ... ... By leave ... ... ... .. ... By Mr. Speaker 2 ... .. 301 - Papers ordered to be printed 212 Papers not ordered to be printed ... 99 311 10\. REPORTS FROM SELECT COMMITTEES- From the Public Petitions A to L Committee 73 From the Public Petitions M to Z Committee 66 From the Native Affairs Committee 115 From the Waste Lands Committee 62 From the Goldfields and Mines Committee From the Local Bills Committee ... 41 From the Railways Committee 41 .. From other Committees 'S ... -- ## ADJOURNMENT. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved, That the House do now adjourn. The House divided. AYES, 24. Hall-Jones Allen, E. G. Parata Heke Allen, J. Seddon Hornsby Steward Arnold Tanner Hutcheson Atkinson Laurenson Carroll Ward. McGowan Teliers. Duncan Flatınan Fisher Millar Fraser, W. Mills Palmer. NOES, 14. Buddo Hall Rhodes Thompson. R. Collins Lawry McGuire Tellers. Ell 25 3 Mckenzie, R. Lethbridge Field 28 Fraser, A. L. D. O'Meara Symes. Majority for, 10. 98 Motion agreed to. 2 Mr. DEPUTY - SPEAKER .- Before leaving 91 191 \-- the chair I would ask the indulgence of honor. able members for a moment. I desire to thar.i. 3 the Right Hon. the Premier for the courtesy 0 and the kind remarks which he made courem- 3 ing the manner in which I have fulfilled ch? onerous duties of Deputy-Speaker. I ras, 64 on behalf of honourable members and myef, \-- 1,286 
<page>1275</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1315</url>
that the Hon. the Speaker (Sir Maurice O'Rorke), through illness, has been unable to preside over our proceedings. I also desire to thank honour- able members for the very great consideration, forbearance, and assistance they have shown to me during this long and arduous session in per- forming the duties of the high office of Deputy- Speaker. I wish them all a pleasant time and good health during the recess, and hope we may all meet again next session in the best of health and spirits to perform the duties we are sent here to carry out. In conclusion, I cannot allow this opportunity to pass without tender-    END OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-NINETEENTH VOLUME. By Authority : JOHN MACKAY, Government Printer, Wellington ing my sincere thanks to all the officers of the House for the valuable and able assistance which they have given to me in performing my duties as Deputy-Speaker during the present session. Major STEWARD (Waitaki) .- May I also be permitted to tender my acknowledgments to the Government and to the House for their graceful recognition of such services as I have been able to render as Acting-Chairman of Com- mittees. The House adjourned at three o'clock p.m (Friday). 
<page>1276</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1316</url>
<page>1277</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1317</url>
NEW ZEALAND.
=== PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
=== Second Session, fourteenth Parliament. LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.  INDEX TO #cc-zero VOLUMES 116, 117. 118. & 119. 1901. WELLINGTON. BY AUTHORITY : JOHN MACKAY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. 1901\. 
<page>1278</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1318</url>
<page>1279</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1319</url>
LEGISLATURE OF NEW ZEALAND.
=== ## GOVERNOR. His Excellency the Right Honourable UCHTER JOHN MARK, Earl of RANFURLY, Knight Com. mander of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St. George. ## THE MINISTRY. Premier, Colonial Treasurer, Minister of Labour, The Right Hon. RICHARD JOHN SEDDON, P.O. and Minister of Defence Colonial Secretary, Postmaster-General, Com- The Hon. Sir JOSEPH GEORGE WARD missioner of Electric Telegraphs, Minister for Railways, Minister of Industries and Com- merce, and Minister of Public Health Native Minister and Commissioner of Stamp The Hon. JAMES CARROLL. Duties Minister of Education and Minister of Immi- The Hon. WILLIAM CAMPBELL WALKER, gration Minister for Public Works and Minister of Marine Minister of Justice and Minister of Mines Minister of Lands, Minister for Agriculture, and  Commissioner of State Forests Commissioner of Trade and Customs .. .. ## ROLL OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCILLORS. Arkwright, Hon. Francis, Wellington. Baillie, Hon. William Douglas Hall, Marl- borough (Chairman of Commitees). Barnicoat, Hon. John Wallis, Nelson. Bolt, Hon. William Mouat, Otago. Bonar, Hon. James Alexander, Westland .\* Bowen, Hon. Charles Christopher, Canterbury. Cadman, Hon. Alfred Jerome, C.M.G., Auck- land. Feldwick, Hon. Henry, Otago. Fraser, Hon. Francis Humphris, Wellington. Gourley, Hon. Hugh, Otago. Grace, Hon. Morgan Stanislaus, C.M.G., Wel- lington. Harris, Hon. Benjamin, Auckland. Holmes, Hon. Mathew, Otago.t Jenkinson, Hon. John Edward, Canterbury. Jennings, Hon. William Thomas, Auckland. Johnston, Hon. Charles John, Wellington. Jones, Hon. George, Otago. Kelly, Hon. Thomas, Taranaki. Kelly, Hon. William, Auckland. Kenny, Hon. Courtney William Aylmer Thomas, Marlborough. Kerr, Hon. James, Westland.] Louisson, Hon. Charles, Canterbury. \* Died 7th November, 1901. + Died 27th September, 1901. 1 Died 25th August, 1901. § Died 6th August, 1901. K.C.M.G. C.M.G. The Hon. WILLIAM HALL-JONES. The Hon. JAMES MCGOWAN. The Hon. THOMAS YOUNG DUNCAN. The Hon. CHARLES HOUGHTON MILLS. Mckenzie, Hon. Sir John, K.C.M.G., Otago.§ MoLean, Hon. George, Otago. Miller, Hon. Henry John, Otago (Speaker). Montgomery, Hon. William, Canterbury. Morris, Hon. George Bentham, Auckland. Ormond, Hon. John Davies, Hawke's Bay. Peacock, Hon. John Thomas, Canterbury. Pinkerton, Hon. David, Otago. Pitt, Hon. Albert, Nelson. Reeves, Hon. Richard Harman Jeffares, Nelson, Rigg, Hon. John, Wellington. Scotland, Hon. Henry, Taranaki. Shrimski, Hon. Samuel Edward, Otago. Smith, Hon. Alfred Lee, Otago. Smith, Hon. William Cowper, Hawke's Bay. Stevens, Hon. Edward Cephas John, Canter- bury. Swanson, Hon. William, Auckland. Taiaroa, Hon. Hori Kerei, Otago. Tomoana, Hon. Henare, Hawke's Bay. Twomey, Hon. Jeremiah Matthew, Canterbury. Walker, Hon. Lancelot, Canterbury. Walker, Hon. William Campbell, Canterbury. Whitmore, Hon. Sir George Stoddart, K.C.M.G., Hawke's Bay. Williams, Hon. Henry, Auckland. 
<page>1280</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1320</url>
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Allen, Edmund Giblett, Waikouaiti . Allen, James, Bruce. Arnold, James Frederick, City of Dunedin. Atkinson, Arthur Richmond, City of Wel- lington. Barclay, Alfred Richard, City of Dunedin. Bennet, James, Tuapeka. Bollard, John, Eden. Buddo, David, Kaiapoi. Carncross, Walter Charles Frederick, Taieri. Carroll, Hon. James, Waiapu. Collins, William Whitehouse, City of Christ- church. Colvin, James, Buller. Duncan, Hon. Thomas Young, Oamaru. Ell, Henry George, City of Christchurch. Field, William Hughes, Otaki. Fisher, George, City of Wellington. Flatman, Frederick Robert, Geraldine. Fowlds, George, City of Auckland. Fraser, Alfred Levavasseur Durell, Napier. Fraser, William, Wakatipu. Gilfedder, Michael, Wallace. Graham, John, City of Nelson. Guinness, Arthur Robert, Grey (Chairman of Committees). Hall, Charles, Waipawa. Hall-Jones, Hon. William, Timaru. Hanan, Josiah Alfred, Invercargill. Hardy, Charles Albert Creery, Selwyn. Haselden, Frederick Henry, Patea." Heke, Hone, Northern Maori. Herries, William Herbert, Bay of Plenty. Hogg, Alexander Wilson, Masterton. Hornsby, John Thomas Marryat, Wairarapa. Houston, Robert Morrow, Bay of Islands. Hutcheson, John, City of Wellington. Kaihau, Henare, Western Maori. Lang, Frederic William, Waikato. Laurenson, George, Lyttelton. \* Unseated on petition, 9th October, 1901. IN Vol. 118, at page 519, 1st column, in comparative statement of the revenue and expendi- ture for the years 1890-91 and 1901-02, the figures should read as follows :- " 1901-1902- Estimated revenue .. Estimated expenditure The words "revenue " and "expenditure " were accidentally transposed. Also, at pages 678 and 679, the word " monotypes," wherever used, should be " monolines." Lawry, Frank, Parnell. Lethbridge, Frank Yates, Rangitikei. Mackenzie, Thomas, Waihemo. Massey, William Ferguson, Franklin. McGowan, Hon. James, Thames. McGuire, Felix, Hawera. MoKenzie, Roderick, Motueka. MoLachlan, John, Ashburton. McNab, Robert, Mataura. Meredith, Richard, Ashley. Millar, John Andrew, City of Dunedin. Mills, Charles Houghton, Wairau. Monk, Richard, Waitemata. Morrison, Arthur, Caversham. Napier, William Joseph, City of Auckland. O'Meara, John, Pahiatua. O'Rorke, Hon. Sir George Maurice, Kt., Manu- kau (Speaker). Palmer, Jackson, Ohinemuri. Parata, Tame, Southern Maori. Pere, Wi, Eastern Maori. Pirani, Frederick, Palmerston. Rhodes, Robert Heaton, Ellesmere. Russell, George Warren, Riccarton. Russell, Hon. William Russell, Hawke's Bay. Seddon, Right Hon. Richard John, Westland. Smith, Edward Metcalf, Taranaki. Smith, George John, City of Christchurch. Stevens, John, Manawatu. Steward, Hon. William Jukes, Waitaki. Symes, Walter, Egmont. Tanner, William Wilcox, Avon. Thompson, Robert, Marsden. Thomson, James William, Clutha. Ward, Hon. Joseph George, Awarua. Wilford, Thomas Mason, Suburbs of Wal- lington. Willis, Archibald Duddingston, Wanganul. Witheford, Joseph Howard, City of Auckland. ## ERRATA. CAS 5,896,000 . .. 5,763,814 .. £132,186" 
<page>1281</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1321</url>
INDEX
=== TO PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES. VOLUMES 116, 117, 118, & 119. ## EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS. Int., Introduction of Bill .- 1R., 2R., 3R., First, Second, and Third Reading .- Dis., Discharged .- h., House of Representatives .- l.c., Legislative Council .- Adj., Adjournment or Adjourned. -Amend., Amendment .- cl., Clause .- Com., Committee of the whole House or Committed. -Recom., Recommitted or Recommittal .- Sel. Com., Select Committee .- Conf., Conference. -Cons., Consideration .- Cons. of Amend., Consideration of Amendments .- Deb., Debate .- Expl., Explanation. - Instr., Instruction .- m., Motion .- Obs., Observation .- q., Question. -m.q., Main Question .- p.q., Previous Question .- Rep., Report .- r.p., Report Progress .- Res., Resolution. ## INDEX TO MEMBERS' SPEECHES.  A. ACTING-CHAIRMAN (Major W. J. Steward), Vol. 118 :- Supply-Class I., 530, 582, 534, 537, 542, 549, 550, 551, 552, 575 Vol. 119 :- Factories Bill, Com. 340 Ocean Mail-services, m. 549, 550 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 675 Payment of Members Bill, Com. 1145 ; Obs. 1145; Com. 1146 Supply- Class II., 25 Class VIII., 260, 262 Class XIV., 416 Class XX., 859 Timber Export Bill, Com. 1219 ACTING-SPEAKER, LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL (Hon. W. D. H. Baillie), Vol. 117 : - Adjournment, m. 532 ALLEN, Mr. E. G., Waikouaiti, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 119 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 323 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 454 Harbour Board Charges, q. 597 Hotchkiss Guns, q. 34 ALLEN, Mr. E. G .- continued. Vol. 116-continued. Milk-vans, q. 247 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2B. 264 Referendum Bill, m. 364 Vol. 117 :- Maori Names of Railway-stations, q. 513 Mine-managers' Certificates, q. 308 Small-bird Nuisance, q. 311 Subsidy to Public Libraries, q. 518 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 102 Mussel Bay Railway-crossing, q. 624 Safe Accommodation for Public Documents, q. 651 Workers' Weekly Railway Tickets, q. 626 Vol. 119 :- Accommodation for War-ships at Port Chal- mers, q. 895 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 357 Harbours, q. 320 Milk-testing, q. 103 Ocean Mail-services, m. 535 Permanent Artillery Pay, q. 194 Post-office for St. Leonard's, q. 903 Supply- Class VI., 246 Class XIV., 431 Class XXI., 865 
<page>1282</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1322</url>
Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 362 Bank of New Zealand, m. 282 Bible-reading in Schools, q. 237 Coal for Government Railways, m. 230 Cyanide Process Extension Bill, 2R. 360 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 18 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 686 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 340, 359 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 574 New Commandant of the Forces, q. 280 Oats for South Africa, m. 230 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, 2R. 586 Public Health Bill, 2R. 360 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 262 Referendum Bill, m. 363 Rolling-stock Contracts, m. 230 Roxburgh Estate, q. 240 Versels chartered by Government, m. 182 : Vol. 117 :- Arbitration Court, q. 88 Breach of Privilege, m. 648, 658 Cocoanut Oil-cake, m. 296 Death of Sir John Mckenzie, m. 288 Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., Obs. 639 Delayed Questions, Obs. 246 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 64 Financial Statement, m. 630, 662 Government Advances to Settlers Act, m. 82 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 192 ; Obs. 216  Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2B. 387 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3). m. 600 Kerr, The late Hon. J., m. 638 Land taken for Drainage Purposes, q. 346   Makohine Viaduct, m. 350 Maori History and Art, q. 247 Military Pensions Board, Q. 473 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 380 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 57 Privilege, Obs. 85, 87 Public Accounts Committee, m. 534 Public Debt of the Colony, m. 83 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 1), 2R. 236, 255 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 153 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 33 ; Obs. 46 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 406 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 1R. 599, 600 Breach of Privilege, m. 343, 380, 384, 391, 413, 434, 441, 465 Burns, The late Mr. A. J., m. 560 Departmental Returns, m. 206 Financial Statement, m. 20; Pers. Expl. 524 Hansard, m. 634 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 647 Mackenzie, The late Mr. M. J. S., m. 560 Military Pensions Act, q. 610 Old-age Pensions, 608 Postponement of Questions, m. 468 Vol. 118-continued. Returned Troopers from South Africa, q. 622 Serjeant-at-Arms, q. 663 Supply- Class I., 525, 530, 532, 540, 549, 550, 552 Class II., 673, 696, 701, 702 Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 204 Advances to Settlers, m. 887 Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 801, 802, 803, 805 Allendale Coal-mine, m. 146 Allendale and Kaitangata Coal-mines, m. 145 Appropriation Bill, 3R. 1268 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2B. 296, 297, 298; m. 1176 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 586 Diack's Petition, m. 41 Easton, Herbert E., m. 888 Epuni Settlement, q. 112 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2B. 352 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 562 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 50 Levels and Waimate Counties Boundaries Alteration Bill, 3R. 753 Library Fund, m. 244 Lime, q. 201 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 764, 765 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, 2R. 1233 Maori Degradation, Petition re, Obs. 390 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 958 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1096 Military Pensions Bill, q. 449 ; 2R. 723 New Zealand Railways Repairs, m. 887; Obs. 1159 Ocean Mail-services, m. 536, 537, 538, 539, 540, 549 Officers of Parliament, q. 5 Opposed Returns, q. 316 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 3R. 720 Parliamentary Session, 1902, q. 1274 Patea Election, Obs. 391, 396 Patea Electoral Roll, Obs. 894 Payment of Interest on £500,000 New Zes- land Debentures invested by Public Trustee, q. 450 Public Debt, m. 147, 148, 150 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 610, 611, 612 Railway Classification and Superannuaticz, m. 57 Railways, New Zealand, Obs. 1159 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1166 State Coal-mines Bill, 2R. 686; Com. 909 Supply- Class II., 19, 20, 24, 25 Class IV., 74, 86 Class VI., 251, 254 Class X., 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 403, 404 Class XIV., 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 42, 423, 424, 425, 429 Supplementary Estimates-Class II., 1244 Unopposed Notices of Motion, q. 98 Wellington Government Offices rented, m. 146 
<page>1283</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1323</url>
ARKWRIGHT, Hon. F., Wellington, Vol. 117 :- Government Arch, q. 289 Referendum Bill, 2R. 9 ARNOLD, Mr. J. F., City of Dunedin, Vol. 116 :- Appointments to Public Departments, m. 30 Bible-reading in Schools, q. 237 Dunedin Railway-station, q. 387 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 488 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 349 Post-and-Telegraph Office for Mornington, q. 245 Prisons Department, m. 231 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 288 Vol. 117 :- Accommodation for Passengers on Southern Trains, q. 510 Ammunition for Volunteers, q. 479 Conciliation Boards, m. 359 Hillside Workshops, q. 511 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 393 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 315 " Sweating," q. 479 Vol. 118 :- Dunedin Evening Star, q. 609 Financial Statement, m. 132, 137 Supply -- Class I., 555, 556 Vol. 119 :- Factories Bill, 3R. 362, 363 Legislative Council Appointments, q. 188 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1132 Supply -- Class IV., 74, 80, 81, 84, 89 Class VI., 251 ATKINSON, Mr. A. R., City of Wellington, Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 362; m. 392 Chinese Immigrants Bill, Com. 392 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 489 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 689 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill 2R. 341 ; m. 359 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 617 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 206 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 655 Counties Bill, m. 181; 2R. 186 Divorce Bill, 2R. 117 ; Obs. 118 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 384 Removal of Licenses, q. 27 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2B. 152 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 1R. 600, 601 Breach of Privilege, m. 392, 432, 442 Financial Statement, m. 184 Licensing Bill, 1R. 644 Money-lenders Bill, m. 660 ATKINSON, Mr. A. R .- continued. Vol. 118-continued. Promissory Oaths Bill, 3R. 637, 640 Supply-Class II., 670, 671 Vol. 119 :- Cook and other Islands Government Bill, Com. 360 ; 3R. 666, 667, 668 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 772, 773, 774, 775, 777 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 167 Local Bills, m. 852, 854 Maori Degradation, Petition re, Obs. 391 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 998 Money-lenders Bill, m. 116, 119, 512, 513, 514 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 1190, 1191 New Zealand Ensign Bill, 2R. 577 Ocean Mail-services, m. 506, 508 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 677, 678; Com. 679; m. 1163 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1134; Com. 1151 Public Works Bill, m. 1251 Review of Reviews, m. 750 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 13, 14 ; 2R. 135, 136, 137, 143, 144 ; 3R. 215, 216 Supply- Class II., 32, 37, 38 Class III., 63 Class IV., 88, 90 Class IX., 396 Class XIV., 431, 432, 433 Class XX., 859 Supplementary Estimates- Class II., 1246 Class III., 1247 Class IV., 1249 Class XVI., 1249 Unauthorised Expenditure, 1251 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1186 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 848, 849 B BAILLIE, Hon. W. D. H., Marlborough, Vol. 116 :- Chairman of Committees, m. 228 Death cf Queen Victoria, m. 4 Personal Explanation, 364 School Attendance Bill, 2R. 464 Vol. 117 :- Disorder in Committee, Obs. 592 Death of the Dowager Empress of Germany, m. 281 State-school Children Drill Bill, 2R. 291 Vol. 118 :- Kerr, Death of the Hon. J., m. 149 Vol. 119 :- Disorder in Committee, Obs. 442 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 68, 70, 72 Holmes, Hon. M., Death of the, m. 39 Maori Antiquities Bill, 2R. 348 
<page>1284</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1324</url>
BAILLIE, Hon. W. D. H .- continued. Vol. 119-continued. Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 272 Railways Classification and Superannuation, q. 351 BARCLAY, Mr. A. R., City of Dunedin, Vol. 116 :-- Address in Reply, m. 109 Advertisements of Quack Medicines, &o., q. 590 Appeal from Land and Income Assessment, q. 381 Cost of Imperial Visit, m. 63 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 425 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 21 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 687 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 560 ; m. 617, 618, 619; 3R. 651 Local Boards for Government Advances, q. 982 Mining Companies Law, q. 603 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 484 Police Regulations, q. 408 Purchase by Government of Historical Relics, &c., q. 390 Registration of Debentures, q. 386 Reorganization of Geological Department, q. 409 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2B. 697 State Note-issue, q. 379 Truancy from Schools, q. 399 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, q. 381 Vol. 117 :- Advances to Settlers Office, q. 348 Breach of Privilege, m. 657, 662 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 195 ; 3R. 588 Government Life Insurance, q. 488   Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 608 Libel Bill (No. 1), 2R. 170 Notices of Motion, m. 532 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 124 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, Com. 360, 524 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 150 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 46 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 1R. 603, 604 Breach of Privilege, m. 361 Cost of Visit of Imperial and Indian Troops and Royal Visit, q. 619 Financial Statement, m. 192 Promissory Oaths Bill, Com. 635 Railway Servants Superannuation and Classi- fication Acts, q. 626 Railway for Kaikorai Valley, q. 650 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), m. 617 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, m. 617, 618 Subsidies for Promotion of Athletics, g. 630 Supply- Class I., 535, 555, 576, 582 Class II., 666, 712 Teachers' Payment for Technical Education, q. 633 BARCLAY, Mr. A. R .- continued. Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2B. 826, 827 Badger, Wilfred, m. 277 Breach of Privilege, q. 896 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 775, 776 Factories Bill, m. 342 ; 3R. 374 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 568 Land-tax and Income tax Bill, 2B. 759 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 226; Com. 279 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 726 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1138 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 3B. 781, 783 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 122 ; 3R. 215 South African War, q. 314 Supplies for Royal Visit, q. 195 Supply- Class II., 27, 31 Class III., 64 Class IV., 85 Class VII., 256 Class VIII., 260, 262, 263, 264, 265 Class XX., 859 Class XXI., 862, 865 Supplementary Estimates-Class II., 1244, 1246, 1247 Ward, Eleanor, m. 586 BENNET, Mr. J., Tuapeka, Vol. 116 :- Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 557 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 260 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2B. 711 Vol. 117 :- Close Settlement in Tuapeka District, q. 25 Imported Stud Horses, q. 347 Lawrence Railway Offices, q. 305 Matakanui Lands for Settlement, q. 252 Railway to Alexandra, q. 97 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 296 Morning Sittings, m. 480 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 824 Central Otago Railways, m. 311 Diack's Petition, m. 42 Factories Bill, 3R. 368 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 563 Lawrence-Roxburgh Road, q. 105 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2B 624 Supply-Class XII., 436 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, R. 847 BOLLARD, Mr. J., Eden, Vol. 116 :- Cycle Boards Bill, 2B. 473 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 689 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bili, 2B. 342 
<page>1285</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1325</url>
Vol. 116-continued. Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 203, 212 Referendum Bill, m. 501 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 251 Vol. 117 :- Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., m. 640 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 388, 390 MoDonnell, The late Constable L., q. 533 Old, John, m. 507 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2B. 260 Vol. 118 :- Auckland-Manukau Canal, q. 612 Breach of Privilege, m. 409 Financial Statement, m. 244 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 649 Married Men in Permanent Forces, q. 612 Owens, Patrick J., q. 652 Post-office at Devonport, q. 625 Railway Classification, q. 623 Supply- Class I., 548, 549, 578 Class II., 667, 670, 703 Widening of Narrow Streets, q. 651 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 830 Factories Bill, m. 337 ; 3R. 365 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 562 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 49 Legislative Council Appointments, q. 596 Lunatic Asylum Attendants, q. 320 Ocean Mail-services, m. 546 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 616 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 54, 57 Railway from Avondale to Karaka Bay, q. 319 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 9 Supply- Class IV., 75, 84, 92 Class VI., 246 Class VII., 257 Class XI., 407, 408 Class XII., 435 BOLT, Hon. W. M., Otago, Vol. 116 :- Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 104 Companies Bill, 2R. 371 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 277 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 332 Vaccination, m. 667 Vol. 117 :- Land for Settlements Aot, m. 497 Land for Settlements Bill, Com. 341 Returned Troopers and Public Health, m. 530 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, m. 524, 528 Shops and Offices Bill, Com. 531, 594 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 500 Vol. 118 :- Companies Bill, m. 336, 504 Law Amendment Bill, m. 594, 596 Miners' Rights Fees, m. 687 Shops and Offices Bill, 3R. 261 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 690; m. 692 Vol. 119 :- Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2B. 1205 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 68 Factories Bill, m. 1201 Government Railways Department Classifica- tion Bill, 2R. 1083 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 647, 733 ; Com. 787 ; 3R. 935 Local Bills, m. 882 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, m. 265 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 3R. 269 Trustee Amendment Bill, m. 832, 833 BONAR, Hon. J. A., Westland, Vol. 119 :- Disorder in Committee, m. 443 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 648 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, m. 445 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 3R. 269 BOWEN, Hon. C. C., Canterbury, Vol. 116 :- Death of Queen Victoria, m. 3 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 277 Inspection of Private Schools, m. 613 Rhodes Trust Bill, 2R. 364 Young Persons Pretection Bill, 2R. 461 Vol. 117 :- Invercargill Reserve Leasing Bill, 2R. 335 Land for Settlements Bill, Com. 336 Statutes Revision Committee, m. 81 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, m. 78; Obs. 139 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette-smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 588 Counties Act Amendment Bill, m. 2R. 688 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 1R. 593 Imported Railway-carriages, q. 398 Mortgages of Land Bill, m. 663 Vaccination, m. 331 Vol. 119 :- Assembly Library, m. 308 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 734 Local Bills, m. 882 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2B. 879 Money-lenders Bill, m. 236 Mortgages of Land Bill, m. 180, 181 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1203 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1202 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 271 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1204 
<page>1286</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1326</url>
Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 85 Counties Act Amendment Bill, 2R. 255 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 552 New Railway-station at Kaiapoi, q. 386 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 288 Through Rate for Grain, q. 189 Training of Volunteers, q. 400 Weight of Grain-sacks, q. 593 Vol. 117 :- Counties Bill, 2R. 189 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, m. 436 Proposed Scale of Teachers' Salaries, &c., 9. 97 Public Health Bill, m. 375 Rangiora Railway-station, q. 90 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 123 Stone-crushing Machinery, q. 96 Vol. 118 :- Carriage of Wool between Oxford and Christ. church, q. 624 Defence Report, m. 461 Financial Statement, m. 9 Morning Sittings, m. 473 North Canterbury Volunteer Corps, q. 621 Physical Drill in Public and Native Schools, m. 616 Supply- Class I., 577, 580 Class II., 676, 683, 687, 696, 702 Trustee Bill, Com. 660 Vol. 119 :- Ballast-train Hands, q. 161 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 584 Factories Bill, Com. 345 ; m. 1219 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 355 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 567 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1093 North Canterbury Volunteer Officers, q. 188 Ocean Mail-services, m. 482, 483, 484, 550 Preservation of Scenery along Cheviot-Kai- koura Road, q. 107 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 609, 610 ; 3R. 782 Southbrook Goods-shed, q. 161 Supply- Class VI., 246, 249 Class VIII., 258, 259, 263 Class X., 398 Class XI., 407, 408, 409 Class XIV., 418, 430 Class XII., 434 Class XXI., 862, 865 Class XXII., 867 Supplementary Estimates - Class XXI., 1250 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1214; Com. 1218 Treatment of Stock Diseases, q. 154 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 846 CARNCROSS, Mr. W. C. F., Taieri, Vol. 116 :- Dunedin-Mosgiel Duplicate Line, q. 191 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 310 Licensing Act, q. 380 Overcoats for Volunteers, q. 190 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 271 ; m. 392 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 265 Referendum Bill, 2R. 221; m. 505 State.school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 292 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 701 Vol. 117 :- Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 62 Freight on Cocoanut Oil-cake, q. 510 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 214 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 248 Supply- Class I., 535 Class II., 670 Vol. 119 :- Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 772 Dunedin Waterworks Extension Bill, 2B., 3R. 751 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 168 Long-service Medals, q. 896 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 3R. 1070 Supply-Class XXI., 865 CARROLL, Mr. J., Waiapu (Native Minister and Commissioner of Stamp Duties). Vol. 116 :- Elective Executive Bill, 2B. 458 Maori Art, q. 195 Native Affairs Committee Petitions, m. 507 Native Land Court, q. 190 Purchase by Government of Historical Relics, &c., q. 391 Rangitane and Ngatikuia Hapus, q. 603 South Island Maoris, q. 391 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 709 Vol. 117 :- Bishop's Reserve and other Native Lands, Masterton, q. 345 Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 437, 441 Native Land Administration Act, q. 519 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 123 Vol. 118 :- Charitable Gifts Bill, Com. 634 Financial Statement, m. 511 Foreign Companies trading in New Zealand. q. 657 Fulloon, Emily Maria, q. 657 Native Affairs Committee's Recommends- tions, q. 654, 658 Tewi Kingi and Others, q. 656 
<page>1287</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1327</url>
Vol. 119 :- Alleged Excessive Drinking of Taranaki Maoris, q. 597 Chatham Islands, q. 596 Graduated Receipt-stamp and Cheque Duty, q. 323 Hohaia Patuone, q. 197 Maori Hostelries, q. 197 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 2R. 557 ; m. 750, 913, 1,000; Com. 1003, 1058; 3R. 1070 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 216, 217, 234 ; m. 278, 279 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1223; Com. 1224 Oeo Native Land, q. 197 Otaki Native School Reserve, q. 324 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 557, 559, 560 3R. 720, 721 Pupuke Lake, q. 598 Railway Concessions to Maoris, q. 198 Rangitoto Island, q. 598 Supply- Class IV., 78, 80 Class VII., 256, 257 Tamaki Block, q. 323 Torotoroa and Taurutu Lagoons, q. 598 COLLINS, Mr. W. W., City of Christchurch, Vol. 116 :- Accommodation at Christchurch Railway- station, q. 595 Address in Reply, m. 37 Appointment of Boiler Inspectors, q. 185 Carriage of Bicycles, q. 595 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 318 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 453 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 522 ; 3R. 629 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 203; m. 266 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 272 Slaughtering Inspectors, q. 405 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 254 Vol. 117 :- Ammunition for .303 Rifles, q. 477 Conciliation Boards, q. 510 Gisborne Anchorage, q. 516 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 392 Law Consolidation, q. 17 Libel Bill (No. 1), 2R. 169 Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, q. 299 Public Accounts Committee, m. 556 Public Health Bill, m. 374 Railway-works, q. 515 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 324 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 125 Wellington City Recreation - ground Bill, 2B. 150 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 415 Financial Statement, m. 321 Supply- Class I., 556, 584 Class II., 678, 683, 714 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 829 Borough Council Officers' Retiring-allow- ances, q. 189, 190 City of Christchurch Electric Power and Loan Empowering Bill, m. 751 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 300, 301 ; Com. 360 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 778 Factories Bill, 3R. 368 Food Trusts Bill, 1R. 840 Habitual Inebriates, q. 99 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- Bill, 2R. 563 Land Boards, q. 588 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 225, 226 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1241 Ocean Mail-services, m. 496, 497, 498, 499 Old-age Pensions Act, q. 188 Order of Business, q. 595 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1118; Com. 1151 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 631, 632 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 134 State Coal-mines Bill, 2R. 694 Supply- Class II., 20, 30 Class III., 65, 79 Class IV., 82, 85 Class VIII., 259, 262, 264 Class XV., 438 Class XXII., 866 Class XXXII., 870 Supplementary Estimates-Class II., 1246 COLVIN, Mr. J., Buller, Vol. 116 :- Boatman's Coal-mine Fire, q. 408 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 319 Old-age Pensions, q. 186 Vol. 117 :- Casual Railway-hands, q. 91 Inangahua River Bridge, q. 103 Maruia Hot Springs, q. 102 Nine-mile Punt, Buller River, q. 103 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 255 Supply-Class II., 704 Tree-planting along Railway-lines, q. 632 Vol. 119 :- Legislative Council Appointments, q. 317 Supply-Class X., 398, 399 D. DEPUTY-SPEAKER (Mr. A. R. Guinness), Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 642, 647, 662 Cross's Property, Mr., q. 479 Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., Obs. 638, 639 Financial Statement, m. 637, 677 
<page>1288</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1328</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, Cons. of Amend. 585, 587 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, Cons. of Amend. 610 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 606 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, 2R. 523 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 506 Police Report of 1901, q. 521 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 546, 550, 553, 556, 562, 563 Stoke Orphanage, q. 484 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 339, 360, 370, 372, 373, 374, 375, 376, 378, 394, 413, 418, 419, 420, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 442, 445, 446, 449, 467 Departmental Statements in Hansard, Obs. 224, 225, 226 Dunedin Evening Star, q. 609 Exclusion of Strangers, q. 151 Financial Statement, m. 45, 46, 53, 118, 171, 289, 310, 314, 325, 326, 328, 485, 525 Hansard, m. 634 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 648 Morning Sittings, m. 480, 481 Mackenzie and Geraldine Counties Bound- aries Alteration Bill, m. 619 O d-age Pensions, Obs. 606 Postponement of Questions, m. 469 Speaker, Mr., Obs. 223, 693 Wednesday Sittings, m. 664, 665  Vol. 119 :- Accommodation for Select Committees, &c., Rep. Sel. Com. 311 Adjournment, Obs. 1275   Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 800, 817 Chatham Islands County Bill, 2R. 575 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 293, 294 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 775 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, q. 108 Debentures under Land for Settlements Con- solidation Act, Obs. 947 Diack's Petition, m. 43 Easton, Herbert E., m. 888, 889 Factories Bill, 3R. 372, 377, 378, 379 Federation Commission Report, q. 900 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 356, 357 Forest Gate Estate, q. 590, 591 His Excellency the Governor, q. 898 Hokitika Harbour Board Endowment Bill, 2R., 3R. 751 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 3R. 170 Kerr, The late Hon. J., Obs. 243 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, m. 243 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 754 Local Bills, m. 852, 853, 855 Maori Degradation, Petition re, Obs. 590 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 2R. 557; m. 715 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 224 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 728 Vol. 119-continued. Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2B. 1180 New Business after Midnight, Obs. 4 North Island Main Trunk Railway, Obs. 894 Ocean Mail-services, m. 460, 461, 462, 463, 476, 495, 514, 555 Officers of Parliament, Obs. 4 Order of Business, Obs. 602 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 558; Obs. 601 ; 3R. 716, 720 Patea Election Petition, Obs. 346 Patea Electoral Roll, Obs. 894 Payment of Interest on £500,000 New Zes- land Debentures invested by Public Trustee, Obs. 449, 451, 452 Payment of Members Bill, Obs. 1146 Personal Explanation, Obs. 950, 951 Privilege, Obs. 1016, et seq. Public Debt, m. 147, 148, 150 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 3B. 784 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 57, 59, 60 Review of Reviews, m. 748, 749, 750 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 18; 2B. 140; 3R. 206, 207, 216 South African War, q. 315 Superannuation of Judges, q. 199 Timber Export Bill, m. 1198 Thompson, R., m. 651, 652 Tour of Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1034 Unopposed Notices of Motion, q. 98 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1187 DUNCAN, Mr. T. Y., Oamaru (Minister of Lands, Minister for Agriculture, and Com- missioner of State Forests), Vol. 116 :- Adjournment, m. 420 Apiti and Norsewood Road, q. 415 Bush Settlers' Rents and Taxes. q. 32 Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, 2R. 266 Dangerous Roads, q. 414 Drummond's Ferry, Papatotara Road, q. 412 Eketahuna-Shannon Road, q. 414 Fair Rent Bill, q. 192 Glenham Estate, q. 412 Gorge Bridge, q. 249 Horowbenua Village Settlement, q. 417 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), 2B. 23 Improvements on Unimproved Lands, q. 416 Inspection of Pigs, q. 413 Kapua Settlement, q. 607 Kelly Suicide, q. 418 Land for Landless Natives, q. 191 Land for Settlement in the King-country, q. 191 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 528 Main East Road, 9. 40 Morven Wesleyan Church Site, Q. 607 Native Bush Reserves, q. 418 Noxious Weeds Act, q. 416 Noxious Weeds Bill, q. 415 
<page>1289</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1329</url>
Vol. 116-continued. Pareora Water-race, q. 608 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2B. 257; m. 266 Rebate to Crown Tenants, q. 188 Small-birds Nuisance Bill, q. 194 Stoats, Weasels, and Ferrets, q. 418 Surveyors' Chainmen, q. 412 Taranaki Dairy School, q. 411 Tasman River, q. 183 Tongahoe Road, q. 414 Waiau Ferry Service, q. 412 Waikakahi and Pareora Roads and Bridges, q. 606 Wairarapa Lake Reclamation, q. 199 Wangamomona-Ohura Road, q. 192 Workmen's Homes, q. 418, 606 Workmen's Homes at Khandallah or Crofton, q. 249 Vol. 117 :- Cable Messages re Frozen Meat, q. 522 Cattle-landing in Auckland Harbour, q. 314 Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, m. 178 Chapman, Mr. A. H., q. 102 Dairy School at Levin, q. 310 Death of Sir John Mckenzie, m. 287 Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., Obs. 639 Dehorning of Cattle, q. 104 Flax-grader for Wellington, q. 308 Gladstone Association, q. 308 Importation of Bones and Bonedust, q. 104 Imported Stud Stock, q. 314, 347 Inangahua River Bridge, q. 103 John Old, m. 503, 506 Land taken for Drainage Purposes, q. 346 Levin and Weraroa Townships, q. 312 Lime- burning, Albury Estate, q. 311 Lime for the West Coast, q. 309 Makuri-Pongaroa Road, q. 315 Maruia Hot Springs, q. 103 Nine-mile Punt, Buller River, q. 103 Orepuki-Waiau-Longwood Road, q. 104 Ostrich-farming, q. 102 Paikakariki Road, q. 809 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, Com. 522, 523 Redcliff and Takitu Small Grazing-run, q. 102 Revaluation at Hokianga and Kaihu, q. 310 River-bede, q. 102 Rotorua Town Council Validation and Ex- tension Bill, 2R. 617 Ruapekapeka Pa, q. 310 Small-bird Nuisance, q. 311 Stoats and Weasels in the North, q. 346 Tax on Stallions, q. 310 Veterinary Surgery, q. 103 Waihi Swamp, q 347 Waste Lands Boards, q. 312 Wellington City Abattoir, q. 318 Wool Classing and Grading, q. 104 Workmen's Homes, q. 314 Vol. 119 :- Auckland Crown Lands, q. 328 Burning Fallen Bush, q. 152 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, q. 107, 153, 326 Vol. 119-continued. Dairy Stud Stock, q. 112 Education Board Reserves, q. 201 Elective Land Boards, q. 327 Epuni Settlement, q. 112 Fair Rent Bill, q. 112 Farmers' Union, q. 108 Forest Reserves, q. 108 Freehold, q. 601 Holmes, Death of the Hon. M., m. 45 Kayes, J. W., q. 109 Kelsey's Bush, q. 114 Kirk's Forest Flora, q. 111 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, q. 201 Land for Workmen's Homes, q. 109 Land Settlement, q. 152 Lawrence-Roxburgh Road, q. 105 Levin Experimental Station, q. 110 Leslie, W. D., q. 106 Lime, Q. 201 Lime for Farmers, q. 111 Maerewhenua Bridge, q. 114 Mangaweka Bridge, q. 111 Maori Leaflets, q. 104 Mauriceville Lime-works, q. 154 Milk-testing, q. 103 Milk-tests in Dairy Factories, q. 113 Mokau River Scenery, q. 116 Native Timber, q. 601 Noxious Weeds, q. 115 Noxious Weeds Act, q. 112 Otara Bridge, q. 104 Otekaike Estate, q. 115 Payment of Road-labourers, q. 156 Poisoning of Poultry, q. 110 Preservation of Scenery along Cheviot-Kai- koura Road, q. 107 Primary Education Reserves, m. 1208 Public Abattoirs, q. 202 Rabbit-poisoning, q. 327 Report of Department of Agriculture, q. 156 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Em- powering Bill, 2R. 1224 ; Com. 1225, 1226 Reserves Disposal and Exchange Bill, q. 154 Reserves for Ngatikuia Tribe, q. 115 Riverton-Howell's Point Road, q. 155 Road to Petone Property, q. 328 Sanatorium at Turakina, q. 108 Sheep-dip, q. 201 State Nursery for Forest-trees, q. 153 Stud Horse for South Canterbury, q. 115 Stud Horse for Western District of South- land, q. 155 Supply- Class XI., 406, et seq. Class XVI., 439, et seq. Class XXVI., 868 Class XXXII .. 870 Treatment of Stock Diseases, q. 154 Taieri Maori Village, q. 156 Veterinary Surgeons, q. 113 Waikakahi, q. 109 Waikato-Onehunga River Trade, q. 114 Workmen's Homes at Invercargill, q. 155 Wellington Land Board, q. 104 Wellington Public Abattoirs, q. 106 Wire Netting for Settlers, q. 104 
<page>1290</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1330</url>
E. ELL, Mr. H. G., City of Christchurch, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 96 Classification at Asylums, q. 388 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 324 Elective Executive Bill, 2B. 456, 459 Fair Rent Bill, q. 192 Homes for Incurables, q. 594 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 21 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 337 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 545 Native Bush Reserves, q. 418 Plumping at Elections, q. 596 Referendum Bill, 2R. 217; Com. 364; m. 503; 3R. 507 Sanatoria for Consumptives, q. 197 Stoats, Weasels, and Ferrets, q. 418 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 698 Vol. 117 :- Financial Statement, m. 677 Gasworks Compulsory Purchasing, q. 250 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 203, 210; Cons. of Amend. 586 Municipal Corporations Act, q. 249 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 565 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 234, 257 Representation Bill, 2R. 107, 111 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 153 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 32 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 401 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 430 Gisborne Appointment to Upper House, q. 623 Safe Accommodation for Public Documents, q. 650 Supply- Class I., 556 Class II., 673, 675, 678, 684, 686, 706, 713 Vol. 119 :-- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 828 Bank-note Stamp Duty, m. 146 Bullion, &c., in Banks, m. 147 Canterbury College and Canterbury Agricul- tural College Act Regulations, q. 165 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 581 Drunkenness at Taihape, q. 599 Education Boards Election Bill, 2R. 358 Factories Bill, m. 346 ; 3R. 371 Food Trusts Bill, m. 840 Forest Reserves, q. 108 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 567 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), m. 858 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 3R. 176 Licensing Act, q. 899 Library Fund, m. 244 Vol. 119-continued. Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 223, 224 Municipal Corporations Act, q. 162 Municipalisation of Public Services, q. 162 Native Birds of New Zealand, q. 319 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1222 Native Timber, q. 601 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1241 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 626 Preservation of Scenery along Cheviot-Kai- koura Road, q. 107 Recreation and Forest Reserves, q. 196 Returns of Drunkenness, q. 324 State Coal-mines Bill, 2R. 695 Supply- Class III., 63 Class IV., 86, 88 Class VI., 250, 258, 262, 263, 264 Supplementary Estimates-Class VI., 1249 Temperance Wall-sheets, q. 319 Totalisator Betting by Telegraph, q. 903 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 846 F. FELDWICK, Hon. H., Otago, Vol. 116 :- Checking Railway Luggage, q. 102; m. 107 Imperial Honours, m. 174 Inspection of Private Schools, m. 612 School Attendance Bill, 2R. 465 Vaccination, q. 667 Young Persons Protection Bill, Com. 492, 552 Vol. 117 :- Invercargill Reserve Leasing Bill, 2R. 335 Library Recess Committee Report, q. 360 Training-ships, m. 134 Troopers, Returned, and Public Health, q. 529 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 406 Kerr, Death of the Hon. J., m. 15 Vol. 119 :- Borough of Mataura Loan Validation Bill, 2R. 875 Chairman of Committees, Election of, m. 68 Chemists' Rota of Attendance Bill, 2R. 647 Gore Cemetery Reserve Vesting and Enabling Bill, 2R. 875 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 787 Local Bills, m. 883 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 877, 880 Old-age Pensions Bill, 3R. 946 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 270, 275 Shops and Shop-assistante Bill, m. 267; Com. 270 
<page>1291</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1331</url>
Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 127 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 486 Horowhenua Village Settlement, q. 416 Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 647 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 298 Vol. 117 :- Abattoir, Wellington City, q. 313 Dairy School, q. 310 Deputy Registrars, Increase to Salaries of, q. 307 Flax-grader for Wellington, q. 308 Levin and Weraroa Townships, q. 312 Makohine Viaduct, q. 516 Manure, Railway Freight on, q. 305 Paikakariki Road, q. 309 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 327 Saddlery, Colonial-made, for New Zealand Troops, q. 488 Silverstream Public Road, q. 17 State Gold mining and Issue of Sovereigns, 9. 489 Tax on Stallions, q. 310 Troopers, Returned, q. 483 Wellington-Manawatu Railway, q. 22 Wool-market, q. 303 Workmen's Homes, q. 313 Vol. 118 :- Australasian Chamber of Commerce, q. 619 Financial Statement, m. 287 Hutt Railway-line, q. 625 Vol. 119 :- Abattoirs, Publio, q. 202 Diack's Petition, m. 44 Farmers' Union, q. 108   Grand Hotel Fire, Auckland, q. 100 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 567 Johnsonville, Close Settlement at, q. 897 Levin Experimental Station, q. 110 Manawatu Railway, q. 189 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 962 ; Com. 1057, 1058 Meat Companies, Ministerial Interest in, q. 192 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 1191 Opium Prohibition Bill, 2R. 907 Otaki Native School Reserve, q. 323 Produce Markets, q. 203 Public Works Bill, q. 165 ; 2R. 1239 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Em- powering Bill, Com. 1227 Rifle Clubs, q. 192 Supply- Class III., 63 Class XI., 410 Class XII., 437 Class XVI., 439 Class XXI., 865 Class XXII., 866 Topographical Plans, q. 902 Volunteer Capitation, q. 203 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 847 Vol. 116 :- Club Charters, q. 595 Cook Strait Ferry Service, q. 601 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 486 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 459 Hansard Reprints, q. 600 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 678 Training-ship, q. 599 Wellington Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 466 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 647, 658 Coal-mines : Report of Royal Commission, m. 242 Coal-mines, State, q. 250 Distress for Rent Bill, q. 28 Fiji, m. 296 ; q. 473 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 394; Com. 442 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 606 " Imprisonment for Debt Limitation Act, 1900," q. 26 Libel Bill (No. 2), 2R. 163, 171 Loan, 4-per-cent. Debenture, m. 641 Lunatic Asylum Attendants' Pay, q. 514 Makohine Viaduct, m. 351 Michael O'Connor, q. 22 Notices of Motion, m. 532 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 48 Payment of Members, q. 29 Police Report of 1901, q. 520 Public Accounts Committee, m. 534, 566 Privilege, m. 84 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 260 Representation Bill, 2R. 109 Stoke Orphanage, q. 250, 484 Terrace Gaol, q. 522 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 155 ; m. 244 Wellington Customhouse, q. 101 Wellington Harbour Board, q. 29 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 35, 38 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 402 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 271, 275, 345, 384, 438, 450, 452 Burns, the late Mr. A. J., m. 561 Departmental Statements in Hansard, m. 225 Financial Statement, m. 85, 146 Fraser, the late Colonel, m. 563 Lee, Mr., late Inspector of Schools, Wel- lington, q. 633 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 648, 649 Licensing Bill, 1R. 645 Mackenzie, the late Mr. M. J. S., m. 561 Members' Election Expenses, q. 610 Morning Sittings, m. 474 Newtown Park, q. 615 Privilege, m. 467 Shorthand Reporters Act, q. 611 Strangers, Exclusion of, q. 151 Supply- Class I., 578, 582 Class II., 666, 673 &c., 701 &c. m. 694 Wednesday Sittings, m. 665 
<page>1292</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1332</url>
Vol. 119 :- Accommodation for Select Committees, &c., Rep. Sel. Com. 311 Claxton, W., q. 99 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 301; 3R. 652 ; m. 1177 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 770 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, q. 107, 325 Delaney, W., q. 315 Donnelly, M. A., q. 101 Drunkenness, Charges of, q. 102 Easton, H. E., m. 888 Factories Bill, 3R. 377 Federation Commission, q. 191, 900 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 357 Food Trusts Bill, m. 840 Gauntlett, Mrs. C. W., q. 587 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, Com. 1033; 3R. 1073 Governor, His Excellency the, q. 898 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 52 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 1051 Levels and Waimate Counties Boundaries Alteration Bill, 3R. 752 Library Fund, m. 243 Local Bills, m. 855 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 970 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1086, 1229 Ministerial Expenses, m. 1024 New Zealand Ensign Bill, 2R. 575 New Zealand Railways, m. 1160 Ocean Mail services, m. 461, 468, 514; Com. 550; m. 551, 556 Payment of Interest on £500,000 New Zealand Debentures invested by PublicTrustee, m. 450  Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1117; Com. 1145 Permanent Militia Uniforms, q. 595 Police-stations, m. 187 Principles of Warfare, q. 591 Privilege, Obs. 1016 Public Health Bill, Com. 1197 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 624 ; 3R. 784 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 61 Review of Reviews, m. 746 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 9 ; 2R. 125, 143 South African War, q. 312 State Coal-mines Bill, 2R. 694 Sunday Closing-hours, &o., English, q. 102 Supply- Class II., 32, &c. Class IV., 79, 84, 85 Claas VI., 250, 253 &c. Class VIII., 265 Class IX., 397 Class X., 398 Class XI., 406 Class XIV., 432 Class XV., 438 Timber Export Bill, m. 1197; 2R. 1215 Unopposed Notices of Motion, q. 96 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1185 Wellington Gaols, q. 99 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 845 Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 63 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 474 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 315 Importation of Big Game, q. 194 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 548 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 263 Railway Rolling-stock, m. 230 Reduction of the Weight of Sacks, q. 35 Referendum Bill, 2R. 504 Volunteers' Ammunition, q. 377 Vol. 117 :- Coal-mines : Report of Royal Commission, m. 242 Counties Bill, 2R. 188 Forest-tree Planting, m. 296 Government Advances to Settlers Bill, 2R. 211 Inspection of Buildings, q. 304 Lime-burning, Albury Estate, q. 311 Public Health Bill, m. 375 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2B. 273 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, q. 508 \--- Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 122 Licensing Bill, 1R. 644 Mackenzie and Geraldine Counties' Bound- aries Bill, m. 619 Vol. 119 :-- Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, 2B. 283 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 583 Diack's Petition, m. 44 Education Board Reserves, q. 201 Elective Land Boards, Q. 327 Factories Bill, Com. 345; 3R. 373 Food Trusts Bill, m. 841 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), m. 858 Lambs destroyed by Seagulls, q. 906 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2B. 758 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 3R. 1068 Orari-Timaru Railway, q. 331 Sheep-dip, q. 201 Steamers between New Zealand and South Africa, q. 593 Stud Horse for South Canterbury, q. 115 Supply- Class XII., 436 Class I., 1245 Timber, Export Duty on New Zealand, q. 895 Waimate Hospital District Bill, m. 453 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 847 FOWLDS, Mr. G., City of Auckland, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 67 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 469, 476 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 489 Land for Settlements Act, m. 378 Land for Settlements Bill, Com. 609 Land-sales, m. 375 Manukau Harbour, q. 389 North Island Main Trunk Railway, q. 389 North Island Railway Extension, q. 389 
<page>1293</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1333</url>
FOWLDS, Mr. G .- continued. Vol. 116-continued. State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 282 Unpresented Returns, q. 240 Vol. 117 :- Auckland Drill-shed, q. 478 Education Boards Elections, q. 344 McDonnell, The late Constable L., m. 532 Public Health Bill, m. 374 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 317 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 27 Foreign Companies : Payment of Stamp-tax, m. 597 Foreign Companies trading in New Zealand, q. 657 Income-tax, 1901, m. 597 Supply-Class II., 710 Wednesday Sittings, m. 664 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 819 Calliope Dock, q. 894 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, m. 1177 Factories Bill, Com. 341 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 49 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 960 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 218 Ocean Mail-services, m. 503  Oyster-fisheries, Auckland, q. 321 Supply- Class VI., 246, 1248 Class XII., 436 #cc-zero Class XXI., 861 Thompson, R., m. 651 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, m. 151 FRASER, Mr. A. L. D., Napier, Vol. 116 :- Fuel for Locomotives, q. 594 Land for Settlements Bill, 2B. 534; 3B. 697, 664 Referendum Bill, 2R. 502 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 297 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2B. 704 Vol. 117 :- Old, John, m. 507 Public Accounts Committee, m .- 553 Public Health Bill, m. 377 Troopers, Returned, q. 477 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 433 Financial Statement, m. 78 Licensing Bill, 1R. 644 Supply-Class I., 536 Vol. 119 :- Factories Bill, 3R. 370 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 52 Maori Degradation, Petition re, Obs. 389 ii-116-119 FRASER, Mr. A. L. D .- continued. Vol. 119-continued. Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 715, 914, 964, 970, 992; Com. 1058, 1059; 8R. 1060, 1065, 1069 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 230 Mining Bill, Com. 1188 Ocean Mail-services, m. 531, 553 Pacific Cable, q. 509 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 558; 8R. 715 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1140 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 12; 2R. 133 Supply- Class II., 24, 32 Class XI., 411 Class XIV., 430 Class XVI., 439 Class I., 1245 (Supplementary) FRASER, Mr. W., Wakatipu, Vol. 116 :- Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 257 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 650 Counties Bill, 2R. 183 Local Government Bill Committee, m. 297 Promissory Oaths Bill, 2R. 397 Public Accounts Committee, m. 540 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 263 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 38 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 358, 384, 430 Earnsoleugh Run, m. 597 Financial Statement, m. 301 Promissory Oaths Bill, 8B. 688 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 788 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 584 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 566 Inspection of Machinery Bill, 2R. 560 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 762 ; Com. 769 Mining Bill, Com. 1183 Money-lenders Bill, m. 511 Ocean Mail-services, m. 527, 544 Payment of Interest on £500,000 New Zea- by Public land Debentures invested Trustee, m. 450 Public Trust Office Bill, 2R. 574 Public Works Bill, 2R. 1238 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1167 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Em- powering Bill, Com. 1227 State Coal-mines Bill, m. 1175 G. GILFEDDER, Mr. M., Wallace, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 156 Aparima Railway-bridge, q. 593 
<page>1294</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1334</url>
GILFEDDER, Mr. M .- continued. Vol. 116-continued. Drummond's Ferry, Papatotara Road, q. 411 Fairfax Stationmaster, q. 403 Hindon Bush Estate, q. 377 Hundred Line Siding, q. 402 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 536 Nightcaps Stationmaster, q. 590 Otautau Telephonic Communication with Lakes, q. 402 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 711 Waiau Ferry Service, q. 412 Waimatuku Railway Wants, q. 384 Vol. 117 :- Death of Sir John Mckenzie, m. 288 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 63 Merrivale Estate, q. 473 Orepuki-Waiau-Longwood Road, q. 104 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 548 Wool Classing and Grading, q. 104 Vol. 118 :-- Financial Statement, m. 1 Vol. 119 :- Bonus for Shale oil, q. 897 Bonus on Kerosene and Paraffine-wax, q. 896 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2B. 632; 3R. 783 Riverton-Howell's Point Road, q. 155 Supply-Class XI., 407 GOURLEY, Hon. H., Otago, Vol. 117 :- Training-ships, m. 135 Vol. 119 :- Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2B. 737 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 878 Ocean Beach Public Domain Bill, 2R. 876 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 275 GRAHAM, Mr. J., City of Nelson, Vol. 116 :- Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 323 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 562 ; Com. 609 State Sanatorium for Consumptives, q. 385 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 292 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 652 Conciliation Boards, m. 353 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 389 ; Com. 442 Midland Railway Debenture-holders, q. 17 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 49 Public Health Bill, m. 377 Vol. 118 :- Egmont County Bill, m. 462 Financial Statement, m. 38, 525 Mackenzie and Geraldine Counties Bound- aries Alteration Bill, m. 619 GRAHAM, Mr. J .- continued. Vol. 118-continued. Morning Sittings, m. 473 Supply- \- -- Class I., 581 Class II., 583, 586 Tadmor Valley Co-operative Works, q. 632 Vol. 119 :- Food Trusts Bill, m. 840 Gore Cemetery Reserves Bill, m. 511 Interest and Sinking Fund, m. 146 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 756 Levels and Waimate Counties' Boundaries Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 40 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1180 ; Rep. Sel. Com. 1188 ; 2R. 1191 ; Com. 1196 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Em- powering Bill, Com. 1228 Supply- Class II., 35 Class XXI., 864 Waimate Hospital District Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 453, 454 GUINNESS, Mr. A. R., Grey (Chairman of Com- mittees). [See also Deputy-Speaker.] Vol. 116 :- Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 307 Opium Importations, q. 383 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 274 ; m. 507 Railway Service Wages, q. 592 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 281, 302 Vol. 117 :- Birth Registrations, q. 342 Civil Service Examinations, m. 296 Coal-mines : Report of Royal Commission, m. 241, 243 Companies Bill, 2R. 417 Counties Bill, 2R. 184 Duty on Gold-saving Fabrics, q. 348 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 195 Grey District Hospital and Charitable Aid Board, q. 305 Immigration of Domestic Servants, q. 20 Junior Civil Service Examination-papers, q. 307 Police Offences Bill, m. 254 Railway-sleepers, q. 301 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 326 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 106 Standard IV. Examination, m. 296 Teachers' Certificate Examinations, q. 307 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 34 Vol. 118 :- Supply-Class II., 703 Vol. 119 :- Cook and other Islands Government Bill Com. 860 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, Com. 1033 Mining Bi Com. 1182 
<page>1295</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1335</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Old-age Pensions Bill, Com. 679, 680 State Coal-mines Bill, Com. 908 Supply- Class III., 63 Class VI., 253 Class VII., 256 Class VIII., 264, 265 Class XII., 435 Class XXI., 864 (Supplementary) H. HALL, Mr. C., Waipawa, Vol. 116 :- Acquisition of Estates in Hawke's Bay, q. 401 Ammunition License-fees, q. 606 Rabbit Nuisance Act, 2R. 259 Railway-sleepers, q. 197 Returned Troopers' Certificates of Discharge, q. 401 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 300 Vol. 117 :- Health Officer, Hawke's Bay, q. 301 "Municipal Corporations Act, 1900," q. 486 Public Health Bill, m. 374 Vol. 118 :- Mortgages of Land Bill, Com. 635  Vol. 119 :- District Court, Dannevirke, q. 324 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, Com. 1224 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1167 Supply- Class XI., 410 Class XVII., 441 Tamaki Block, q. 323 HALL-JONES, Mr. W., Timaru (Minister for Public Works and Minister of Marine), Vol. 116 :- Annett, Miss, q. 247 Appointment of Boiler Inspectors, q. 185 Classification at Asylums, q. 388 Classification of Inmates of Lunatic Asylums, q. 198 Cook Strait Ferry Service, q. 602 Copies of Bills for Public Libraries, q. 603 Dental Inspection of School-children, q. 388 Fish-hatcheries, q. 184 Hansard Reprints, q. 601 Harbour Board Charges, q. 597 Hurunui River Bridge, q. 390 Kaipara Railway, q. 599 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 543 ; m. 576 Manukau Harbour, q. 388 Marine Charts, q. 390 Masterton-Waipukurau Loop-line of Railway, q. 184 North Auckland Railway Extension, q. 389 North Island Main Trunk Railway, q. 388 598 Proclamation of the King, q. 236 Vol. 116-continued. : Railway through Pahiatua Electorate, q. 246 Shool-teachers' Classification, q. 598 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 282 Stratford-Kawakawa Railway, q. 192 System of Payment to Co-operative Work- men, q. 183 Training-ship, q. 599 Truancy from Schools, q. 389 Uniform School-books, q. 193 Waiau River Bridge, q. 390 Vol. 117 :- Auckland Government Arch, q. 343 Auckland Public Offices, q. 518 Breach of Privilege, m. 654 Collingwood-Ferntown Bridge, q. 96 Cook Islands Auxiliary Steamer, q. 306 Co-operative Workers, q. 100 Education Boards Elections, q. 345 Gisborne Anchorage, q. 516 Hansard Reprints, q. 98 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 387, 395 ; Com. 441, 442, 443, 490; m. 613, 617 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 606 Junior Civil Service Examination-papers, q. 307 Kaikoura Fish Industry, q. 517 Kawakawa-Whangamomona Railway, q. 97 Kiourangi Point Lighthouse, q. 99 Lunatic Asylum Attendants' Pay, q. 514 Lunatic Asylum Employés, q. 516 Makohine Viaduct, q. 344, 516; m. 349, 351 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 412, 416 Oeo Point Lighthouse, q. 514 Passengers on Government Steamers, Unoffi- cial, q. 516 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 51 Proposed Scale of Teachers' Salaries, &c., 9.97 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 549 Railway to Alexandra, q. 97 Railway to Hanmer Plains, q. 518 Railway-works, q. 515 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 280 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 122 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 106 Subsidising Public Libraries, q. 97, 518 Tadmor Bridge, q. 99 Teachers' Certificate Examinations, q. 307 Timaru Harbour Board District and Harbour Board Bill, m. 342 Uniform Set of School-books, q. 343 Waimate High School Cadet Corps, q. 100 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 151, 153, 154 Wellington Customhouse, q. 101 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 398, 411 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 407 Dunedin Hospital Trustees, q. 653 Election of School Committees and Educa- tion Boards, q. 633 Engineers' Certificates, q. 633 
<page>1296</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1336</url>
HALL-JONES, Mr. W .- continued. Vol. 118-continued. Financial Statement, m. 306, 314 Firemen's Certificates, q. 633 Lee, Mr., late Inspector of Schools, Wel- lington, q. 633 Lighthouse, Cape Brett, q. 650 Money-lenders Bill, Com. 659, 660 Owens, Patrick J., q. 652 Railway for Kaikorai Valley, q. 650 Safe Accommodation for Publie Documents, q. 650, 651 Supply- Class I., 556, 581 Class II., 678, 679, 680 Tadmor Valley Co-operative Works, q. 632 Teachers' Payment for Technical Education, q. 633 Teachers' Salaries, q. 652 Widening of Narrow Streets, q. 651 Windsor-Livingstone Railway, q. 634 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 789, 790; 2R. 792, 830; Com. 832 Auckland Oyster-fisheries, q. 321 Barry's, Captain Jackson, Book, q. 163 Canterbury College and Canterbury Agricul- tural College Act Regulations, q. 165 Commissioners of Education Reserves, q. 196 Deaf-and-dumb Institution, Sumner, q. 164 Education Boards Election Bill, 2R. 359; Com. 561 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2B. 351, 358 ; Com. 561 Free Railway-passes for School-children, q. 322 Harbours, q. 320 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 561, 571 Inspection of Machinery Bill, 2B. 560; Com. 561 Levels and Waimate Counties' Boundaries Alteration Bill, 3R. 753 Lunatic Asylum Attendants, q. 320 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1103 Mining Bill, 2R. 1180 Money-lenders Bill, m. 118, 511, 514 Native Birds of New Zealand, q. 320 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, Com. 1220 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1242 North Island Main Trunk Railway, m. 894, 895 Patea Election Petition, Obs. 347 Petition re Maori Degradation, Obe. 391 Public Works Act Amendment Bill, q. 165 Public Works Bill, 2R. 1238 Public Works Statement, m. 638 Railway from Avondale to Karaka Bay, q. 319 Railways Authorisation Bill, Com. 1104 ; 2R. 1167 Recreation and Forest Reserves, q. 196 School Attendance Bill, 2R. 279; m. 280; 3R. 1168 Shipping and Seamen Bill, m. 278 HALL-JONES, Mr. W .- continued. Vol. 119-continued. Supply- Class VI., 250, 251, 252, &c. Class VIII., 257, 258, 259, &c. Class XIII., 437, 438 Class XX., 859 Class XXI., 861, 862, 863, 864 Class XXII., 866, 867 Class XXIII., 867 Class XXV., 868 Class II., 1246 (Supplementary) Class VI., 1247 Class XIV., 1248 Class XV., 1249 Class XXII., 1250 m. 1251 Temperance Wall-sheets, q. 319 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, m. 151 Waimate Courthouse, q. 195 Waimate Hospital District Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 453 HANAN, Mr. J. A., Invercargill, Vol. 116 :- Book-keeping of Local Bodies, q. 400 Clifton Railway-platform, q. 590 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), 683 Invercargill Police-station, q. 407 Invercargill Reserve Leasing Bill, 2R. 468 Main East Road, q. 409 New Gaol for Invercargill, q. 606 Preferential Railway-rate on Waipahi-Heriot Railway, q. 590 Public Health Regulations, q. 406 Railway Freights on Firewood, q. 407 Railway Workshops at Invercargill, q. 403 Southland Police District, q. 604 Wages of Casual Railway-bands, q. 590 Vol. 117 :- Invercargill Railway-station, q. 489 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 414 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 22. 230 Rifle Clubs, q. 16 Workers' Compensation for Accidents, q. 31 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 409 Vol. 118 :-- Financial Statement, m. 59 Southland Volunteers, q. 615 Supply-Class I., 534 Vol. 119 :- District Courte, q. 199 Superannuation of Judges, q. 199 Supply-Class XIV., 419 Workmen's Homes at Invercargill, q. 155 HARDY, Mr. C. A. C., Selwyn, Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m 420 Financial Statement, m. 324 Second-class Railway-carriages, q. 627 HARRIS, Hon. B., Auckland, Vol. 119 :- Injured Members of Contingents, q. 1003 
<page>1297</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1337</url>
HASELDEN, Mr. F. H., Patea, HERRIES, Mr. W. H .- continued. Vol. 116 :- Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 641 Vol. 117 :- Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 216 ; m. 577 Makohine Viaduct, m. 352 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 47, 59 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 126 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 119, 818 Supply-Class II., 672, 706, 715 HEKE, Mr. H., Northern Maori, Vol. 118 :- Adjournment, m. 500 Financial Statement, m. 506 Licensing Bill, 1B. 644 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 830 Appointments to Legislative Council, q. 191 Hohaia Patuone, q. 197 Maori Hostelries, q. 197 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 972, 981, 996; 3R. 1066; m. 1161 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2B. 558; 3B. 717 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 130 Sir George Grey's Papers, q. 194 Supply-Class XXI., 861  Surplus Crown Lands, m. 887 HEBRIES, Mr. W. H., Bay of Plenty, Vol. 116 :- #cc-zero Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 362 District Courts Bill, 2R. 394 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 15, 17 ; 2R. 22 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2B. 336 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 554; q. 572; Com. 574, 609 ; 3R. 620 Native Affairs Committee Petitions, m. 508 Old-age Pensions Regulations, m. 13 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 270; Com. 392 Proclamation of the King, q. 236 Public Health Bill, Obs. 608 Referendum Bill, Com. 393 Surveyor-General, q. 186 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 705 Trustee Bill, 2R. 361 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 250 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 651 Cambridge Domain, q. 252 Cemetery Trustees Validation and Appoint- ment Bill, m. 240 Coal-mines : Report of Royal Commission, m. 241 Cook Islands Laws, m. 296 Cook Islands Native Land Court, q. 253 Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., m. 638 Freehold Estates, m. 296 Vol. 117-continued. Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 195; m. 585 Government Balnealogist, q. 304 Governor of Fiji's Speech, Q. 89 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, Com. 442 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 595 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 491 Native Land Administration Act, q. 518 Native Land Titles, m. 296 Old Soldiers' Claims, q. 90 Promissory Oaths Bill, 2R. 896 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 558 Representation Bill, 2R. 108 Return re Large Estates, q. 485 Rhodes Trust Bill, 2R. 240 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 106 Waibi Swamp, q. 347 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill ,3R. 38 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 410 Vol. 118 :- Adjournment, m. 500 Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 2B. 597 Breach of Privilege, m. 66, 76, 355, 875, 444 Departmental Returns, m. 204 Departmental Statements in Hansard, m. 225 Fiji, q. 614 Fraser, The late Colonel, m. 562 Fulloon, Emily Maria, q. 657 Judgments of High Court of Rarotonga, q. 611 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 647 Licensing Bill, 1R. 644 Old-age Pensions, m. 607 ; q. 612 Promissory Oaths Bill, 3R. 636 Supply- Class I., 534, 536, 537, &c. Class II., 585, 695, 701, 704 &c. Vol. 119 :- Accommodation for Select Committees, &c., Rep. Sel. Com. 311 Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 791 ; 2R. 811 Appointments to Legislative Council, q. 191 Companies Bill (No. 2), 2R. 1179 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 289; Com. 360; 3R. 656; m. 1176; Com. 1178 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 582 Debentures under Land for Settlements Con- solidation Act, m. 948 Departmental Land and Buildings, q. 317 Duties in Cook Islands, q. 156 Factories Bill, 3R. 366 Government Railway Time-table, q. 906 High Commissioner's Court for the Western Pacific, q. 100 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 50 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), m. 855 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 166; Com. 168; 3R. 169 Inspector of Prisons, q. 599 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, Com. 700; 3R. 700 
<page>1298</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1338</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Local Bodies' Loans Bill, Com. 768 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 954; 8R. 1062, 1072 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 219; Com. 279 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 726 Mining Bill, 2R. 1181 Monday Sittings, m. 188 Money-lenders Bill, m. 118 New Zealand Ensign Bill, 2R. 576 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1242 Ocean Mail-services, m. 519, 552 Old-age Pensions Bill, m. 1162 Opium Prohibition Bill, 2R. 306 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 558 Payment of Members Bill, Com. 1149, 1150 Public Debt, m. 148 Public Health Bill, m. 1188 Railway Expenditure, q. 907 Railways Authorisation Bill, Com. 1104; 2R. 1164 Rarotonga Justices, q. 100 Rotorua Medical Officer, m. 146 State Coal-mines Bill, Com. 909; 3R. 909; m. 1174; Com. 1175 Supply- Class II., 31, 36, 37 Class IV., 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81 Class VI., 250, 251, &c. Class VIII., 263, 264 Class IX., 397 Class X., 397, 399 Class XI., 408, 412, 413 Class XII., 434 Clase XIV., 419, 430, 431, &c. Class XV., 438  Class XVI., 439 Class XX., 859 (Public Works Fund) Class XXII., 866 Class XXIII., 868 Class XXXI., 869 Timber Export Bill, Com. 1198, 1218 HOGG, Mr. A. W., Masterton, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 76 Dangerous Roads, q. 414 District Courts Bill, 2R. 394 Eketahuna-Shannon Road, q. 413 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 449 Imported Railway Passenger-carriages, m. 182 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 520; 3R. 624 Masterton-Waipukurau Loop-line of Railway, q. 184 New Commandant of the Forces, m. 281 Rabbit Nuisance Act, 2R. 255, 265 ; m. 266 Referendum Bill, 2R. 219; m. 506 Registration of Land Transfers, q. 248 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 290 System of Payment to Co-operative Work- men, q. 183 Vol. 117 :- Bishop's Reserve and other Native Lands, Masterton, q. 345 Counties Bill, 2R. 184 Vol. 117-continued. Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 205 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 609 Lunatic Asylum Employés, q. 516 Masterton Cadet Corps and Rifle Club, q. 475 Masterton Courthouse, q. 312 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 382 Municipal Markets, q. 20 Officers of Local Bodies, m. 82 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 507 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 563 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, Com. 522, 523 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 263 Rifle Team for Bisley Meeting, q. 475 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 105, 106 Telegraph Messengers, q. 513 Veterinary Surgery, q. 103 Vol. 118 :-- Breach of Privilege, m. 409 Exclusion of Strangers, q. 151 Financial Statement, m. 53, 237, 278 Government Loans to Local Bodies, q. 611 Morning Sittings, m. 473 Mortgages of Land Bill, Com. 635 New Zealand Products in London Market, q. 623 Railway Operatives' Plébiscite, q. 629 Supply- Class I., 553 Class II., 584, 676, 685, 709 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 824 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 23 300 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 583 Factories Bill, 3R. 371 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 571 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 50 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 757 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 989 Mauriceville Lime works, q. 153 Members of Parliament in Public Positions, q. 588 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1099 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1242 Ocean Mail-services, m. 518 Petition re Maori Degradation, Obs. 300 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2B. 616 Public Service: Particulars re Names, &c .. q. 317 Railway Service Regulations, q. 161 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 130 Special Settlements, m. 146 State Nursery for Forest-trees, q. 153 Supply- Class IV., 74, 79, 81 Class VI., 245, 247 &c. Class X., 397 Class XI., 405, 407, 409 Claes XIV., 430 Class XXI., 863 (Publio Works Fund, Class II., 1244, 1245 (Supplementary) 
<page>1299</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1339</url>
Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 81 District Courte Bill, 2R. 395 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 316 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 565 ; 3R. 627, 637 Rimutaka Railway, m. 182 Terms of Judicial Appointments, q. 194 Wairarapa Lake Reclamation, q. 199 Wairarapa Land for Settlement, q. 383 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 649 Cable Messages re Frozen Meat, q. 522 Dehorning of Cattle, q. 104 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, Com. 442 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 361 Cycle Boards Bill, Com. 618 Financial Statement, m. 34 Orderlies at Parliament House, q. 609 Privilege, m. 465, 467, 506 Supply- Class I., 537, 553, 554, 577, 583 &c. Class II., 583, 678, 686, 699, 715 Vol. 119 :- Barry's, Captain Jackson, Book, q. 163 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 770 Factories Bill, Com. 342 ; 3R. 385 Gore Cemetery Reserves Bill, m. 510 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1103; m. 1229 Ocean Mail-services, m. 514, 552 Opium Prohibition Bill, 2R. 306 Patea Election, m. 393 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1110; Com. 1148 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 7; 2R. 120, 130; 3R. 206, 215 Supply- Class II., 21, 23, 36 Class IV., 76 Class VIII., 258, 259 Class IX., 397 Class XI., 405, 406, 409 &c. Class XIV., 414, 417, 419 Class XXI., 863 (Public Works Fund) Class XXXI., 869 Class II., 1246 (Supplementary) Class XIV., 1248 HOUSTON, Mr. R. M., Bay of Islands, Vol. 116 :- Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 319 Farmers' Union, Obs. 376 Mangonui, q. 381 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 479, 485 Uniform School-books, q. 193 Vol. 117 :- Mail-delivery, q. 91 Public Health Bill, m. 379 Railway Charges, q. 299 Revaluation at Hokianga and Kaihu, q. 310 Ruapekapeka Pa, q. 309 \- Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 496 Lighthouse, Cape Brett, q. 651 Mangonui Mounted Infantry, q. 610 Vol. 119 :-- Captured Guns, m. 146 Factories Bill, m. 335; Com. 340, 343; 3R. 364 Leslie, W. D., q. 106 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1223 Supply- Class VII., 257 Class XI., 405 Class XXI., 860 (Public Works Fund) Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1214 Whangarei -- Kawakawa Railway, q. 160 HUTCHESON, Mr. J., City of Wellington, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 167 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 308 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 692 Lillywhite, Charles, q. 191 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 284 ; Com. 486 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 656 Cook Islands Auxiliary Steamer, q. 306 Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., m. 640 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, Com. 443, 490 Lease in Perpetuity, m. 296 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 554, 558 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 320 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, Com. 360 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 147, 150, 158; m. 244 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 31, 42 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 1R. 597 ; 2R. 598, 606 Breach of Privilege, m. 74, 409, 420, 437 Financial Statement, m. 163 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 649 Money-lenders Bill, Com. 659, 660 Morning Sittings, m. 481 Supply- Class I., 534, 538, 554, 555, 556, 577 &c. Class II., 584, 585, 674, 700 &c. m. 694 Wellington Gaols: Escaped Prisoners, m. 597 Vol. 119 :-- Cook and other Islands Government Bill, m. 1161 Factories Bill, m. 333, 339, 346; Obs. 1174 Food Trusts Bill, m. 841 Gaol Warders, m. 146 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 169; m. 1048 Local Bills, m. 853 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1194 
<page>1300</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1340</url>
Vol. 119-continued. New Zealand Ensign Bill, Com. 1169 Ocean Mail-services, m. 490; Com. 551; m. 552 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 676; Com. 680 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1120; Com. 1148, 1150 Point Halswell Gaol: Escaped Prisoners, g. 102 Public Works Bill, 2R. 1238; Com. 1239 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 59 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 148 ; 3R. 208, 216 South African War, q. 814 Supply- Class II., 21, 28, 86, 38 Class III., 63 Class IV., 81, 84, 86, 89, 90 Class VI., 247 Class II., 1245, 1246 (Supplementary) Class III., 1247 m. 1251 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1034 Victoria College Site Bill, 2B. 1184; Com. 1220, 1240 Wellington Graving-dock and other Works, q. 895 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 845, 852 Wright, Police Sergeant, q. 101 J.  JENKINSON, Hon. J. E., Canterbury, Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 585 Chairman of Committees, m. 228   Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 106 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 180 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 672 Public Health Bill, 2R. 493 Vaccination, m. 666 Young Persons Protection Bill, m. 58 Vol. 117 :- Health Officer, Wellington, q. 173 Police Offences Bill, Com. 176 Referendum Bill, 2R. 79 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, m. 526 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 371; Com. 531, 593, 595 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, m. 77 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 2R. 293; m. 501 Vol. 118 :- Blaramberg, H. von, m. 455 Companies Bill, m. 502 Hospital and Charitable Aid Boards, m. 500 Informal Petitions, m. 202 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement. Bill, 2R. 884 Vol. 119-continued. Canterbury College Empowering Bill, 2R. 876 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, m. 1085 Coupons in Tea, m. 93 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 69 Factories Bill, m. 1013; Com. 1015; m. 1170 FitzGerald, William Crothers, m. 579 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, 2R. 1082; 3R. 1083 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 787 ; m. 833; 3R. 918, 942 Local Bills, m. 882 Lyttelton Borough Council Empowering Bill, 2B. 876 Maori Antiquities Bill, 2B. 350 Public Trust Office Bill, 2R. 1172 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 274 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 3R. 267, 968 Taheke Settlers, m. 389 Victoria College, m. 1199 JENNINGS, Hon. W. T., Auckland, Vol. 116 :- Arbor Day, m. 373 Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, 2R. 565 Chairman of Committees, m. 228 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 3R. 329 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 322 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 672 Public Health Bill, 2R. 493 Standard Certificates, q. 327 Trawling, q. 365 Vaccination, m. 665, 668 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 461 ; 3B. 614 Vol. 117 :- Land for Settlements Bill, m. 339 Referendum Bill, 2R. 10 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 367, 427; Com. 531 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, m. 71, 137 Vol. 118 :- Blaramberg, H. von, m. 454, 458 Companies Bill, m. 339 Exportation of Arms Bill, 28. 661 Friendly Societies, q. 640 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 690 Vaccination, m. 330, 332 Vol. 119 :- Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 2 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, 2B. 874. 875; m. 1085 Egmont National Park Bill, 22. 580 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 71 Factories Bill, m. 1009, 1170, 1171 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 28. 648 Government Railways Department Classi- fication Bill, 2R. 1082 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill 2B. 702, 710; 3R. 939 Kairanga County Bill, 2R. 880 
<page>1301</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1341</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Maori Antiquities Bill, 2R. 350 Palmerston North Reserves Bill, 2B. 880 Patea Harbour Bill, 28. 877 Sly-grog Selling, q. 701 Whakapuaka Block, m. 874 JOHNSTON, Hon. C. J., Wellington, Vol. 117 :- Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 2R. 293, 294 ; m. 501 Vol. 119 :-- Disorder in Committee, m. 443 JONES, Hon. G., Otago, Vol. 116 :- Appointment of the New Commandant, Obs. 327 Chairman of Committees, m. 227, 229 Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 105, 107 Companies Bill, 2R. 372 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 278 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 180, 181; 3R. 365 Imperial Honours, m. 175 Low Amendment Bill, 2B. 583 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 329 Police Offences Bill, 2B. 672 Vol. 117 :- Death of Sir John Mckenzie, m. 282 Disorder in Committee, Obs. 592 Land for Settlements Act, m. 494 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 336; 3R. 361 Returned Troopers and Public Health, m. 529 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, m. 528 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 429 State-school Children Drill Bill, 2R. 291 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, m. 501 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 405, 589; m. 692 Companies Bill, m. 338, 503 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 2R. 591 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, m. 203 Law Amendment Bill, m. 596 President Mckinley : Attempted Assassina- tion, m. 400 Shope and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 690 Vol. 119 :- Disorder in Committee, m. 443; Obs. 447 Election of Chairman of Committees, Rep. Sel. Com. 67; m. 69, 70, 71, 72 Factories Bill, m. 1010; Com. 1075; m. 1170; m. 1200, 1201 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 648 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2B. 736 Inspection of Meat, q. 915 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 3R. 1157, 1158 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 238; m. 242 Vol. 119-continued. Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1204 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1202 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2B. 837 ; m. 946; Com. 1004 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 271 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, m. 95; 3R. 268 Victoria College, m. 1199 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1205 Whakapuaka Blook, m. 872 K. KAIHAU, Mr. H., Western Maori, Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 491 Landless Maoris in Waikato, q. 654 Native Affairs Committee's Recommenda- tions, q. 657 Vol. 119 :- Alleged Excessive Drinking of Taranaki Maoris, q. 597 Maori Land, m. 187 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 750, 967, 984; Com. 1057, 1058, 1059 Ocean Mail-services, m. 553 Railway Concessions to Maoris, q. 198 KELLY, Hon. T., Taranaki, Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 584 Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, 2R. 585 Chairman of Committees, m. 227 Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 105 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 277 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 180, 181 Inspection of Private Schools, m. 613 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 672 Vaccination, m. 667 Young Persons Protection Bill, 8R. 615 Vol. 117 :- Death of Sir John Mckenzie, m. 282 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 337; 3R. 362; m. 471, 502 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 177 Referendum Bill, 2R. 4, 81 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, m. 526 Training-ships, m. 137 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 2R. 294; m. 500 Vol. 118 :- Blaramberg, H. von, m. 457 Cigarette-smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 403, 588 Companies Bill, m. 501 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, m. 203 Law Amendment Bill, m. 595 Physical Drill in Public and Native Schools Bill, 3R. 588 President Mckinley: Attempted Assassins- tion, m. 399 
<page>1302</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1342</url>
KELLY, Hon. T .- continued. Vol. 118-continued. President MoKinley, Death of, m. 558 Vaccination, m. 331 Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 1207 Assembly Library, m. 309 Commonwealth Tariff, q. 265 Charitable Gifta Bill, 2R. 3 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, 2R. 874; m. 1084 Egmont County Bill (No. 2), 2R. 876 ; m. 947 Election of Chairman of Committees, Rep. Sel. Com. 66; m. 69, 72 Endowments for Primary Education, m. 1151 Factories Bill, m. 1012; m. 1170, 1171 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, 3R. 1083 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 833, 834 Local Bills, m. 882 Maori Antiquities Bill, 2R. 349 Maori Councils Bill, 2R. 836 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 1154 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 880 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, m. 266 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 240 Mortgages of Land Bill, Com. 181 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1203 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1202 Public Trust Office Bill, 2R. 1172 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 273 Railway Dining-care, q. 785 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 3R. 267 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1201 Trustee Amendment Bill, m. 832   Victoria College, m. 1199 KELLY, Hon. W., Auckland, Vol. 116 :- Fulloon, E. M., q. 611 Vol. 117 :- Land for Settlements Act, m. 493 Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 363 Vol. 119 :- Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, 3R. 1083 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 1152 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1203 Old-age Pensions Bill, m. 946 School Attendance Bill, m. 1169 Whakapuaka Block, m. 873 KERR, Hon. J., Westland, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 25 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 278 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 181 Vol. 117 :- Referendum Bill, 2R. 79 State-school Children Drill Bill, 2R. 290, 292 L. LANG, Mr. F. W., Waikato, Vol. 116 :- Land for Settlement in the King-country, q. 191 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 523 Local Option Poll in King-country, q. 185, 186 Referendum Bill, Cons. of Amend. 506 Stratford-Kawakawa Railway, q. 192, 193 Wangamomona-Ohura Road, q. 192 Vol. 117 :- Carriage of Artificial Manures, q. 298 Counties Bill, m. 189 Dineen, M. D., q. 474, 475 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 217 Mercer Railway-station, q. 512 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 505 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 270 Subsidising Public Libraries, q. 97 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 278 Kingi, Tewi, and Others, q. 656 Morning Sittings, m. 472 Postponement of Questions, m. 469 Queen's Birthday, q. 621 Settlement in Kawhia County, q. 619 Supply-Class II., 586, 703 &c. Vol. 119 :- Appointments to Legislative Council, q. 190 Auckland-Waikato Railway, q. 905 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 584 Diack's, Mr., Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 43, 44 Federal Tariff, The, q. 588 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 569 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 961; 3R. 1066 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1242 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 678 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 3R. 718 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1132 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 61 Railway Servants Superannuation Bill, q. 162 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, m. 947 Supply- Class IV., 75, 77 Class VI., 252 Class XI., 405, 410 Class XII., 434 Public Trust Office, 442 Class XXI., 860, 863 (Public Works Fund) LAURENSON, Mr. G., Lyttelton, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 115 Appointments to Railway Service, q. 356 Dental Inspection of School-children, q. 399 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Biil, 2B. 347 
<page>1303</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1343</url>
LAURENSON, Mr. G .- continued. Vol. 116-continued. Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 652 Marine Charts, q. 390 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 273 Referendum Bill, Cons. of Amend. 503 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 295 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 703 Troopship " Tagus," Obs. 236 Vol. 117 :- Divorce Bill, 2R. 118 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 203; Cons. of Amend. 580 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 390 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 415 Public Health Bill, Cons. of Amend. 375 Public Servants and Local Bodies, q. 18 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 275 Vol. 118 :- Chatham Islands Local Government, q. 620 Election of School Committees and Educa- tion Boards, q. 633 Financial Statement, m. 17 Supply- Class I., 554, 576 &c. Class II., 684, 697 &c. Vol. 119 :- Execution of Criminals: Press Representa. tives, q. 325 Factories Bill, 3R. 384 Freehold, q. 601 Lyttelton Forts, q. 192 Mokau Rivery Scenery, q. 116 Ocean Mail-services, m. 529, 540 Payment of Members Bill, Com. 1145 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 615 Public Works Bill, 3R. 1239 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, Com. 1225 Supply- Class II., 23 Class VI., 248, 252 &c. Class VIII., 264, 265 Class XI., 407 Class XIV., 416, 433 Class XII., 434 Supplementary Estimates- Class II., 1245 Class VI., 1248 Victoria College Site Bill, Com. 1187 LAWRY, Mr. F., Parnell, Vol. 116 :- Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 693 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 339 Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 644 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 699 Vol. 117 :- - Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 439 Financial Statement, m. 682 Hotel Licenses, q. 253 Liquor-selling in King-country, q. 14 LAWRY, Mr. F .- continued. Vol. 117-continued. McDonnell, The late Constable L., Rep. Sel. Com. 533 Makohine Viaduct, q. 344 Patent Rights, q. 312 Remuera Waterworks Empowering Bill, 2R. 147 Waste Lands Boards, q. 312 Vol. 118 :- Ellerslie Railway-station, q. 623 Fraser, The late Colonel, m. 563 Licensing Bill, 1R. 645 Liquor Licenses in King-country, q. 618 Supply- Class I., 555 Class II., 669, 671 m. 693 Vol. 119 :- Appropriation Bill, 3R. 1270 Diack's, Mr., Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 42 Graduated Receipt-stamp and Cheque Duty, q. 322 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 243 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, Com. 1228 LETHBRIDGE, Mr. F. Y., Rangitikei, Vol. 116 :- Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 488 Vol. 117 :- Co-operative Workers, q. 100, 101 Lime for the West Coast, q. 309 Rifle Clubs, q. 251 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 199 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Aot, q. 614 Vol. 119 :- Kirk's " Forest Flora," q. 111 Mangaweka Bridge, q. 111 Noxious Weeds Act, q. 111 Otara Bridge, q. 104 Patea Election, m. 510 Supply- Class X., 399 Class XXI., 862, 864 (Public Works Fund) Class XXXI., 869 LOUISSON, Hon. C., Canterbury, Vol. 117 :- Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 364 Referendum Bill, 2R. 5 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 370; Com. 595 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette- smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 589 Companies Bill, 3R. 504 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 2R. 592 Shops and Offices Bill, 3R. 261 
<page>1304</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1344</url>
Vol. 119 :- Chairman of Committees, Election of, m. 71 Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 2, 3 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2B. 879 Rabbit. Nuisance Bill, m. 273 M. MACKENZIE, Mr. T., Waihemo, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 138 Annett, Miss, q. 247 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 325 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 20 Land for Settlements Bill, 2B. 539, 545 ; Com. 611 ; 3R. 639 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 204 Maori Art, q. 195 Railway Service Wages, q. 592 Railway-siding between Ranfurly and Wed- derburn, q. 36 Referendum Bill, Cons. of Amend. 500; 3R. 507 Sanatorium near Naseby, q. 35 State Fire Insurance Bill, Com. 182 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 282 Vol. 117 :- Colonial Scale of Staffs and Salaries for Public-school Teachers, m. 144 Criminal Assaults on Women and Children, q. 488 Divorce Bill, 2R. 116 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 67, 145 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 390; Cons. of Amend. 613 ; 3R. 614 Imperial Trade Zollverein, q. 14 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 609 Kerse, Charles, and Others, Rep. Sel. Com. 472 Libel Bill (No. 1), 2R. 168 Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 288 Patea Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 51, 56 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 436 Public Health Bill, Cons. of Amend. 378 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 125 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 38 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 2R. 604 Dunedin Hospital Trustees, q. 652 Financial Statement, m. 229, 238 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 649 Licensing Bill, 1R. 645 Privilege, Breach of, m. 77 Railway-siding, Otago Central Railway, q. 631 Serjeant-at-Arms, q. 663 Supply- Class II., 676, 687, 697 &c. m. 694 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2B. 817, 821 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2B. 293 Correction, A, Obs. 1208 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 583 Diack's, Mr., Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 40, 42 &c. Drunkenness at Poolburn, q. 600 Dunedin Waterworks Extension Bill, 28. 751 Factories Bill, 3R. 390, 384 &c. 1 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2B. 354 Forest Planting, q. 318 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2B. 568 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 243 Library Fund, m. 244 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 3R. 1067 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 218 Midland Railway Company, Rop. Sel. Com. 1100, 1101, &c. Military Pensions Bill, Com. 449 Ocean Mail-services, m. 499; Com. 549; m. 554 1 Otago Central Railway Rates, q. 330 Parliamentary Library, q. 312 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1112, 1115; Com. 1151 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 617 3B. 781 Rabbit-poisoning, q. 326 Reciprocity with America, q. 897 South African War, q. 314 Steam Service between New Zealand an South Africa, q. 329 Supply- Class II., 30, 33 Class IV., 76, 88 Class VI., 245, 246, &c. Class VIII., 259, 260, &c. Class XI., 406 Class XIII., 438 Class XVI., 439, 441 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1212 Trade with South Africa, q. 329 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, Rep. Sel. Com. 151 MASSEY, Mr. W. F., Franklin, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 149 Adjournment, m. 419 Counties Bill, m. 13 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 322 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 158 Federation Commission Report, q. 198 Free Railway-passes, m. 230 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), 2R. 23 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 694 ; 3R. 604 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 352, 354 &c. Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 547 ; 3R. 653 Ministerial Travelling Allowances and Ex- penses, m. 373 Morning Sittings, m. 249 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 482 
<page>1305</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1345</url>
Vol. 116-continued. Provision for Injured Constables, q. 197 Public Health Bill, Obs. 608 Railway Rolling-stock, m. 230 Railway Spark-arrester, q. 246 Referendum Bill, Cons. of Amend. 499 South African Charters, m. 230 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 296 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 251 Workmen's Homes, q. 418 Vol. 117 :- Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, Cons. of Amend. 178 Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 439 Colonial Scale of Staffs and Salaries for Public-school Teachers, m. 144 Compensation to Troopers for Loss of Horses, q. 20 Counties Bill, 2R. 182; m. 190 Four-per-cent. Debenture Loan, m. 640, 641 Gladstone Association, q. 308, 309 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 207 ; Cons. of Amend. 581, 585 Government Advertisements, m. 83 Importation of Bones and Bonedust, q. 105 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 602 Land for Settlements Bill, Cons. of Amend. 491 Local Government Bill Committee, m. 297 Maheno Lime-kilns, m. 82 Makohine Viaduct, m. 349, 352 McDonnell, The late Constable L., Rep. Sel. Com. 533 Oats for South Africa, m. 842 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 504, 506 Ostrich-farming, q. 102 Patea Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 55 Police Offences Bill, Cons. of Amend. 254 Privilege, Breach of, m. 650, 662 Promissory Oaths Bill, 2R. 897 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 549, 564 Public Health Bill, Cons. of Amend. 374 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 271 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 127 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 107 Unauthorised Expenditure, q. 297 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, q. 15, 510 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 2B. 604 Departmental Statements in Hansard, m. 225 Eight Hours Bill, Com. 618 Financial Statement, m. 138, 148 Hansard, m. 634 Licensing Bill, 1R. 644 Mckinley, President, Death of, m. 559 Morning Sittings, m. 475, 480 Privilege, m. 465 Privilege, Breach of, m. 363, 375, 407 &c. Promissory Oaths Bill, 3R. 635, 639 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), Com. 616 Stud Animals imported from Britain, m. 597 Vol. 118-continued. Supply- Class I., 532, 545 &c. Class II., 584, 586, 666 &c. Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 789 Brown, G., Rep. Sel. Com. 887 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 298 ; m. 1177 Co-operative Labourers in Patea Electorate, m. 887 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 581 Diack's, Mr., Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 49 Duty on Agricultural Implements, m. 187 Factories Bill, m. 331 ; Com. 339, 344; 3R. 366 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 355 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 563 Hunua Coal Area, q. 600 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 2R. 46 ; 3R. 49, 52 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 167; Com. 168 Kayes, J. W., q. 109, 110 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 758 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 243 Library Fund, m. 245 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2B. 764 Maori Degradation, Petition re, Obs. 390 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 3R. 1066 Maori Relics Bill, Com. 278 Monday Sittings, m. 188 Money-lenders Bill, Cons. of Amend. 518 New Zealand Troopers' Horses, q. 194 Ocean Mail-services, m. 472 Old-age Pensions Bill, Com. 679 Opium Prohibition Bill, 2R. 306 Order of Business, m. 714 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 3R. 718 Parker, Constable, q. 198 Patea Election, m. 993, 510 Patea Election Petition, Obs. 346, 347 Patea Electoral Roll, m. 894 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1124; Com. 1150 Public Debt, m. 148 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 614, 619; 3R. 783 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, m. 947; Com. 1225, 1227 Reserves Disposal and Exchange Bill, q. 154 Returns, q. 596 South African War, q. 313 State Coal-mines, q. 599 State Coal-mines Bill, m. 1175 Supply- Class II., 18, 28 &c. Class III., 62 Class IV., 82, 84 Class VI., 245, 247 &c. Class VII., 256 Class VIII., 259, 262 &c. Class IX., 396 
<page>1306</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1346</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Supply-continued. Class X., 398 Class XI., 408, 409 &c. Class XII., 434, 437 Class XIII., 437 Class XIV., 420, 430 &c. Class XVI., 440, 441 Class XVII., 441 Class XXI., 860, 862 (Public Works Fund) Class XXVI., 868 Supplementary Estimates- Class II., 1246 Class VI., 1247, 1248 Timber Export Bill, m. 1198; Com. 1198; 2R. 1215 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, Rep. Sel. Com. 151 Waikato-Onehunga River Trade, q. 114 McGOWAN, Mr. J., Thames (Minister of Mines and Minister of Justice), Vol. 116 :- Ammunition License-fees, q. 606 Boatman's Coal-mine Fire, q. 408 Cyanide Process Extension Bill, 2R. 359, 360 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 475 Dentists as Jurymen, q. 194 District Court for Auckland, q. 604 District Courts Bill, 2R. 393 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 679 Invercargill Police-station, q. 408 Liability for Workmen's Wages, q. 248 Licenses to sell Guns and Ammunition, q. 35 Lillywhite, Charles, q. 191 Looney, Thomas, q. 407  Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, 2B 697 Mining Companies Law, q. 603 New Gaol for Invercargill, q. 606 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 268, 275 ; 3R. 507   Police Protection at St. Andrew's, q. 408 Police Regulations, q. 408 Provision for Injured Constables, q. 197 Referendum Bill, Cons. of Amend. 500 Reorganization of Geological Department, q. 409 Rivers Commission Report, q. 195 Southland Police District, q. 605 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 301 Supreme Court Judges, q. 606 Terms of Judicial Appointments, q. 194 Waimate Courthouse, q. 408 Vol. 117 :- Awamoko Stream, q. 93 Coal Commission, q. 93 Coal-mines : Report of Royal Commission, m. 240, 241 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 60 Four-per-cent. Debenture Loan, m. 639 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 389 Increase to Salaries of Deputy Registrars, q. 307 Manaia Magistrate's Court, q. 520 . McDonnell, The late Constable L., Rep. Sel. Com. 533 Masterton Courthouse, q. 312 Vol. 117-continued. Mine-managers' Certificates, q. 308 Patent Rights, q. 312 Police Offences Bill, Cons. of Amend. 254 Police Report of 1901, q. 521 Privilege, Breach of, m. 651, 652 Promissory Oatbs Bill, 2R. 396, 397 Rivers Commission, q. 92 Royal Visit : Rewards to Police Force, q. 93 Sly-grog Selling at Port Albert, q. 93 Supreme Court Judges' Salaries, q. 93 Terrace Gaol, Wellington, q. 522 Vol. 118 :- Coroners' Inquests, q. 658 Departmental Statements in Hansard, m. 226 Financial Statement, m. 92, 95 Fraser, The late Colonel, m. 562 Pahiatua District Court, q. 658 Privilege, Breach of, m. 74, 374, 375, 414 &c. Promissory Oaths Bill, 3R. 639 Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 205 Appointments as Stipendiary Magistrates, q. 101 Australian Lottery Advertisements, q. 103 Badger, Wilfred, Rep. Sel. Com. 278 Charges of Drunkenness, q. 102 Claxton, William, q. 99 Coal-mines Bill, m. 721; Cons. of Amend. 1161 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 585 District Court, Dannevirke, q. 324 District Courts, q. 199 Donnelly, M. A., q. 101 Drunkenness at Pcolburn, q. 600 Drunkenness at Taihape, q. 599 Easton, Herbert E., Rep. Sel. Com. 888 English Sunday Closing-hours, &c., q. 102 Execution of Criminals : Press Representa- tives, q. 325 Grand Hotel Fire, Auckland, q. 100 Habitual Inebriates, q. 100 High Commissioner's Court for the Western Pacific, q. 101 Hunua Coal Area, q. 600 Inspection of Coal-mines, q. 200 Inspector of Prisons, q. 600 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, 3R. 700 Medical Comforts for the Wellington Gaols, q. 99 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1100 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 723 Mining Bill, 2R. 1181 ; Com. 1182, 1183 Ocean Mail-services, m. 494 Paeroa River, q. 200 Parker, Constable, q. 198 Point Halswell Gaol : Escaped Prisoners, q. 102 Rarotonga Justices, q. 100 Returns of Drunkenness, q. 324 Review of Reviews, m. 749 State Coal-mine, q. 599 State Coal-mines, q. 599 
<page>1307</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1347</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Superannuation of Judges, q. 199 Supply- Class IV., 73, 75 &c. Class X., 397, 398 &c. Class XV., 438, 439 Supplementary Estimates- Class IV., 1247 Class XVI., 1249 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, Rep. Sel. Com. 151 Waitekauri Public Battery, q. 200 Wellington Gaols, q. 99 Wright, Police Sergeant, q. 101 MCGUIRE, Mr. F., Hawera, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 160 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 305 Land for Settlements Bill, Obs. 495 ; 2R. 529 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 295 Taranaki Dairy School, q. 410 Tongahoe Road, q. 414 Wellington-New Plymouth Railway, q. 404 Workmen's Homes, q. 606 Vol. 117 :- Crown Lands for Settlement, q. 522 Manaia Magistrate's Court, q. 520 Oeo Point Lighthouse, q. 513 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 505 Old Soldiers' and Sailors' Claims, q. 251 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 329, 334 Winter Railway-excursion Fares, q. 510 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 214 Supply- Class I., 579 Class II., 705 Vol. 119 :- Ammunition for Volunteers and Rifle Clubs, q. 312 Cash Land-values in Waimate and Hawera, m. 147 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 585 Diack's, Mr., Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 43 Flynn, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 278 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 759 Land Valuation Act, q. 159 Maori Degradation, Petition re, Obs. 390 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1098 Ocean Mail-services, Com. 547 Oeo Native Land, q. 196 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 559 Patea Election, m. 393 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1124 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1166 Supply-Class IV., 79 MCKENZIE, Mr. R., Motueka, Vol. 116 :- Boatman's Coal-mine Fire, q. 409 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 450 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 678 Vol. 116-continued. "L" Wagons for Nelson-Motupiko Railway, q. 590 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, 2R. 696 Vol. 117 :- Coal Commission, q. 93 Collingwood-Ferntown Bridge, q. 96 Counties Bill, 2R. 185 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, Com. 442 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 599, 603 Kiourangi Point Lighthouse, q. 99 Makohine Viaduct, m. 349 Patea Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 55 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 274 Rivers Commission, q. 92 Tadmor Bridge, q. 99 Vol. 118 :- Co-operative Workmen, q. 614 Postponement of Questions, m. 468 Privilege, Breach of, m. 437, 451 Strangers, Exclusion of, q. 151 Supply-Class I., 576 Vol. 119 :- Brown, G., Rep. Sel. Com. 887 Coal-mines Bill, m. 722; Com. 722 Diack's, Mr., Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 40, 41 Easton, Herbert E., Rep. Sel. Com. 888 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 49 Land.tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 759 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, Com. 769 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1101 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 1191 ; 2R. 1192 Noxious Weeds, q. 115 Ocean Mail-services, Com. 549; m. 553 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 128 Supply- Class X., 401 Class XII., 436 Supplementary Estimates- Class II., 1244, 1245, &c. Class V., 1247 Class VI., 1248 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1183 Waimate Hospital District Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 453 MCLACHLAN, Mr. J., Ashburton, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 69 Ashburton County Council Empowering Bill, 2R. 374 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 693 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 524 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 204 Railway from Patterson's Creek to Spring- field, q. 596 Railway Passengers, Q. 189 Referendum Bill, 3R. 507 Springburn Branch Line, q. 190 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 300 
<page>1308</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1348</url>
MCLACHLAN, Mr. J .- continued. Vol. 117 :- Ashburton Drill-shed, q. 21 Returned Troopers' Fare from Sydney, q. 88 Royal Visit: Rewards to Police Force, q. 93 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 106 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 172 Privilege, Breach of, m. 413, 436 Vol. 119 :- Ocean Mail-services, m. 525, 553 Patea Election, m. 393 Supply- Class VI., 252 Class VIII., 264 Class X., 398 Class XI., 405, 411 Class XVI., 439, 440, &c. MCLEAN, Hon. G., Otago, Vol. 116 :-- Colonial Bank Liquidation, m. 580 Companies Bill, 2R. 370 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 3R. 866 Industrial Disputes, m. 611 Referendum Bill, 2R. 670 Vaccination, m. 667 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 460 Com. 491; m. 583, 584; 3R. 615 Vol. 117 :- Cemeteries Bill, Cons. of Amend. 237  Land for Settlementa Bill, m. 470, 502 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, 2B. 463 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 427 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, m. 76 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette-smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 402 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 2B. 591 McKinley, President: Attempted Assassina- tion, m. 399 Mckinley, President, Death of, m. 558 Shops and Offices Bill, 3R. 267, 269 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 884 Assembly Library, m. 309 Chairman of Committees, Election of, m. 70, 73 City of Auckland Leans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, 2R. 875 Disorder in Committee, Obs. 443, 444 Factories Bill, m. 1004 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 709; Obs. 833, 834 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 785 Land Transfer Assurance Fund, m. 94 Local Bills, m. 882 Lyttelton Borough Council Empowering Bill, 2R. 876 MCLEAN, Hon. G .- continued. Vol. 119-continued. Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 878 \- Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, m. 266, 268 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 837 ; Com. 886; 3R. 946 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, m. 95 Trustee Bill, Cons. of Reasons 832 Whakapuaka Block, m. 872 McNAB, Mr. R., Mataura, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 111 Glenham Estate, q. 35, 412 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, 2R. 586, 587, &c. Stock-loading Yards at Otamita, q. 402 Waimabaka-Tokonui Railway, q. 33 Vol. 117 :- Companies Bill, 2R. 418 Counties Bill, m. 185, 188 Divorce Bill, 2R. 118 Falconer, John, and Others, Rep. Sel. Com. 244 Leases in Perpetuity, m. 82 Local Government Bill Committee, m. 297 1 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2B. 380 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 434, 437 Privilege, Breach of, m. 660 Rabbits and Rabbit-skins, m. 82 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, Com. 360 Volunteers' Lost Rifles, q. 250 Vol. 118 :- Morning Sittings, m. 472, 483 Privilege, Breach of, m. 74, 273, 896 Supply-Class I., 532, 542 &c. Vol. 119 :- Appointmenta to Legislative Council, q. 199 Beattie, James, Rep. Sel. Com. 1085 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 580 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 777 Factories Bill, m. 1174 Gore Cemetery Reserves Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 511 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 569 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3B. 51 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 167 ; 38. 175 Maori Degradation, Petition' re, Obs. 390 Maori Relios Bill, 2R. 221 Mining Bill, 2R. 1180 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 1188 New Zealand Contingents: Casualties, m. 146 Ocean Mail-services, m. 540, 552 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 135 Supply-Class XIV., 428 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, Rep. Sel. Com. 151 
<page>1309</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1349</url>
Vol. 116 :- Classification of Inmates of Lunatic Asylums, q. 198 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 472 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 316 Hurunui River Bridge, q. 389 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 22 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 687 Kaikoura Daily Mail-service, q. 598 Land for Settlements Acts, m. 182 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 581; Com. 610, 611 ; 3R. 660 Lincoln Agricultural College, q. 377 New Commandant of the Forces, m. 280 "Newtown Park Scandal," q. 34 Oats for South Africa, m. 373 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 482 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 283 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 707 Treatment of Cadets at Christchurch, q. 195 Visit of Imperial Troops, m. 374 Waiau River Bridge, q. 390 Vol. 117 :- Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 440 Counties Bill, 2R. 182 ; m. 190 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 210 Hansard Reports, q. 98, 99 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 611 Kaikoura Fish Industry, q. 517 Kaikoura Mounted Rifles, q. 18 McDonnell, The late Constable L., Rep. Sel. Com. 532 Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 288 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 486 #cc-zero Railway to Hanmer Plains, q. 518 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 268 Returned Troopers' Pay, q. 487 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 124 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 107 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 46, 525 Morning Sittings, m. 474 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), Com. 617 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, Cons. of Amend. 618 Supply- Class I., 576, 580 &c. Class II., 583, 584 &c. Vol. 119 :- Appropriation Bill, 2R. 1251 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, 2R. 282 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, Com. 360 Deaf. and-dumb Institution, Sumner, q. 163, 165 Diack's, Mr., Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 48 Easton, Herbert E., Rep. Sel. Com. 888 Egmont National Park Bill, 2R. 280 Excessive Drinking by Maoris, Rep. Sel. Com. 586 Factories Bill, Com. 340 ; 3R. 375 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 355 ili-116-119 Vol. 119-continued. Food Trusts Bill, Int. 840, 842 Free Railway-passes for School-children, q. 322 Gaming and Lottery Permits, m. 145 Hokitika Harbour Board Endowment Bill, 2R. 751 Oats for South Africa, m. 146 Ocean Mail-services, Com. 551 ; m. 555 Personal Explanation, Obs. 950, 952 Precedence, q. 319 Preservation of Scenery along Cheviot- Kaikoura Road, q. 107 Privilege, Obs. 1018, 1019, &c. Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, q. 587 ; 2R. 620 ; 3R. 783 Railway Rates for Timber, q. 202 Representation of New Zealand at the King's Coronation, 902 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, Com. 1225 Royal Review in Christchurch, q. 900 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 132 School Attendance Bill, m. 280 Supply- Class II., 19, 23 Class III., 62 Class IV., 79, 83 Class VI., 252, 254 &c. Class VIII., 258, 260 &o. Class X., 398 Class XI., 408, 411 Class XIV., 413, 415 &c. Class XVI., 440 Class XVII., 441 Class XX., 860 (Public Works Fund) Class XXI., 864 Class XXII., 867 Class XXIII., 867, 868 Supplementary Estimates- Class II., 1246 Class XXI., 1250 (Public Works Fund) Government Life Insurance Department, 1251 Thompson, R., Rep. Sel. Com. 651 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1214 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1035 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, Rep. Sel. Com. 150 Ward, Eleanor, Rep. Sel. Com. 586 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, Int. 847 MILLAR, Mr. J. A., City of Dunedin, Vol. 116 :- Dunedin Post-office, q. 596 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 312 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 680, 686 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 345 Local Bodies' Loans, q. 379 Referendum Bill, Cons. of Amend. 504 Returned Troopers, q. 379 San Francisco Mail-service, m. 231 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 283 ; Com. 486 Volunteer Uniforme, q. 380 
<page>1310</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1350</url>
Vol. 117 :- Conciliation Boards, q. 480 Coronation of His Majesty, q. 25 Dunedin Art Gallery, q. 481 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 60, 145 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 603 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 507 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 266 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 2R. 602 Burns, the late Mr. A. J., m. 561 Engineers' Certificates, q. 633 Financial Statement, m. 20 Firemen's Certificates, q. 633 . Mackenzie, The late Mr. M. J. S., m. 561 Rate on Sulphuric Acid, q. 632 Supply- Class I., 575, 576 Class II., 582, 584 &c. Trustee Bill, Com. 660 Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 203 Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 791 Companies Bill (No. 2), 2R. 1179; Com. 1179 Coolie Labour at Colonial Sugar Company's Fiji Mills, q. 188 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, Com. 1240 Dunedin Waterworks Extension Bill, 2R. 751 Factories Bill, Com. 341, 342, &c. Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R 353 Government Lime-kilns at Maheno, m. 311 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Cons. of Amend. 1045 Inspection of Coal-mines, q. 200 Loans to Local Bodies, m. 187 Ocean Mail-services, m. 464; Com. 545, 548, &c. Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1140 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and . Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, 2R. 1224 State Coal-mines, q. 599 State Coal-mines Bill, 2R. 693 Supply- Class IV., 73, 74 &c. Class V., 92 Class VI., 245, 249 &c. Class XXII., 866, 867 (Public Works Fund) Class XXIII., 867, 868 Class XXV., 868 Clase XXVI., 868 Supplementary Estimates-Class VI., 1247 Waimate Hospital District Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 453 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, Int. 844 MILLS, Mr. C. H., Wairau (Commissioner of Trade and Customs), Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 46 Chinese Immigrants Bill, Com. 393 Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 622, 637 Vol. 117 :- Advances to Settlers Office, q. 94, 348 Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 440 Completion of Valuation-rolls, q. 95, 96 Duty on Glass-making Machinery, q. 94 Duty on Gold-saving Fabrics, q. 349 Government Advances to Settlers Extension \- Bill, 2R. 191, 218 ; Cons. of Amend. 579 Local Bodies' Valuations, q. 94 Makohine Viaduct, m. 351 Privilege, Breach of, m. 653 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 106, 107 Stone-crushing Machinery q. 96 Vol. 118 :- Financial Statement, m. 107 Vol. 119 :- Advances to Settlers Act, q. 158 Advances to Settlers Valuation Fees, q. 157 Customs Department Superannuation, q. 323 Duties in Cook Islands, q. 157 Land Valuation Act, q. 159 Patea Election, m. 393 Supply- Class VI., 245, 248 &c. Class XIV., 420, 427 Class XVII., 441 Supplementary Estimates- Class III., 1247 Class VI., 1247, 1248 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1208, 1216; Com. 1218, 1219 MONK, Mr. R., Waitemata, Vol. 116 :- Berry, Rev. Joseph, q. 401 Cost of the Royal Visit, m. 230 District Courts Bill, 2R. 396 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 425 Farmers' Union, Obs. 376 Food-stuffs for South Africa, m. 230 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 691 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 333, 347 Kaipara Flats-Wellsford Railway, q. 33 Kaipara Railway, q. 598 Land for Settlements Bill, 2B. 549; 3R. 642, 657 Licenses to sell Guns and Ammunition. q. 35 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 199 Military Drill in Schools, q. 240 "Newtown Park Scandal," q. 33 New Zealand Ensign Bill, q. 13, 239 Referendum Bill, Cons. of Amend. 496 State school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 297 Vol. 117 :- Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 438 Conciliation and Arbitration Cases, m. 83 Conciliation Boards, m. 356 East Coast Land Settlements Estates, q. 24 Four-per-cent. Debenture Loan, m. 640 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 198 Importation of Saddlery, q. 13 
<page>1311</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1351</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 605 McDonnell, The late Constable L., Rep. Sel. Com. 533 Mortgage-tax, q. 21 New Zealand Ensign Bill, q. 88 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 552, 554 Public Health Bill, Cons. of Amend. 378 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 267 Royal Visit, Obs. 238 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 127 Sly-grog Selling at Port Albert, q. 93 Stoats and Weasels in the North, q. 345 Uniform Set of School-books, q. 343 Vol. 118 :- Charitable Gifts Bill, Com. 635 Early Records of the Colony, q. 620 Financial Statement, m. 314 Fraser, Hector, q. 624 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 648 Morning Sittings, m. 471 Privilege, Breach of, m 352, 431, 433 &c. Supply- Class I., 553, 555 &c. Class II., 583, 674 &c. Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 791 ; 2R. 805 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, m. 1176 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 585 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 353 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 754 #cc-zero Legislative Council Appointments, q. 595 Mackay, Mrs. James, q. 190 Maori Antiquities Bill, 2R. 227 Maori Degradation, Petition re, Obs. 390 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 978; 3R. 1067 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 727 New Zealand Eusign Biil, 2R. 577 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1242 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 558 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1130 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 627 Pupuke Lake, q. 598 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1166 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, m. 947 ; Com. 1227 Rifle Clubs, q. 192 Rifles for Rifle Clubs, q. 318 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 131 Supply- Class II., 19, 22 &c. Class III., 64 Class IV., 78, 79, &c. Class VI., 249, 252 Class VIII., 259, 263 Class XII., 437 Class XIV., 418, 430 Thompson, R., Obs. 652 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1212 Vol. 117 :- Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 282 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, m. 78, 133 MORRISON, Mr. A., Caversham, Vol. 117 :- Conciliation Boards, m. 358 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 61 N. NAPIER, Mr. W. J., City of Auckland, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 56 District Courts Bill, 2R. 396 District Court for Auckland, q. 603 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 314 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 444, 454 Fiji, q. 374 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 683 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 558 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 202 North Island Main Trunk Railway Viaducts, q. 597 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, 2R. 587 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 293; Com. 486 Vaile's Railway Stage System, Obs. 374 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 253 Vol. 117 :- Advances to Settlers Office, q. 94 Auckland Public Offices, q. 517 Australasian Squadron, q. 481 Defence, q. 483 Financial Statement, m. 623 Flour-millers' Association, q. 480 Garrison Artillery Officer, q. 20 Imperial or Colonial Naval Reserve, q. 482 Importation of Bones and Bonedust, q. 104 Kawakawa-Whangamomona Railway, q. 97 Licensing Laws, q. 248 Maori History and Art, q. 247 McDonnell, The late Constable L., Rep. Sel. Com. 533 Passenger Steamers between Australia and New Zealand, q. 18 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 542, 548, 557 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, Com. 173 Rhodes Trust Bill, 2R. 238 Rifle-ranges, q. 482 Rolling-stock for Waikato Line, q. 512 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 126 Submarine-mining Boat, q. 19 Supreme Court Judges' Salaries, q. 93 Volunteer Regulations, q. 19 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bil', 2R. 151 Vol. 118 :-- Crown Grants in Deeds Registry Offices, q. 627 Mail-trains : Onehunga and Auckland, q. 628 Promissory Oaths Bill, Com. 635 Railway Charges, q. 628 
<page>1312</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1352</url>
Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 814 Carriage of Butter, q. 903 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, Com. 360, 361 ; 8R. 664 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 779 Disfranchisement of Wellington, q. 315 Evidence Further Amendment Bill, Com. $59 Export Duty on Balk Timber, q. 592 Factories Bill, Cons. of Amend. 345; Com. 346 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 352 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 755, 758 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 220 New Zealand : Colony or State, q. 315 Ocean Mail-services, m. 484 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1114 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1166 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 11 Supply- Class IV., 74, 75, 78, 79, 80, 83, 84, 87, 92, 93 Class VI., 248 Class VII., 257 Vaile Stage Railway System, m. 788 O. O'MEARA, Mr. J., Pahiatua, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 122 Alleged Misconduct of Volunteers, q. 243 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 313 Gorge Bridge, q. 249 Kelly Suicide, q. 412 Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 654 Railway through Pahiatua Electorate, q. 248 Supreme Court Judges, q. 606 Woodville County Bill, 2B. 467, 468 Vol. 117 :- Cross's, Mr., Property, q. 479 Encouraging Population, q. 476 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 613 Makuri-Pongaroa Road, q. 315 Mangatoro Estate, q. 15, 89 Passages to Great Britain for New Zealand Troopers, q. 31 Woodville County Bill, m. 359, 360 Woodville Refreshment-room, q. 25, 478 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 360 Financial Statement, m. 207 Pahiatua District Court, q. 658 Rates on Crown Leases by County Councils, q. 614 Woodville Post-office, q. 624 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, q. 610 Vol. 119 :- Advances to Settlers Act, q. 157, 159 Appropriation Bill, 2R. 1263 Australian Lottery Advertisemente, q. 102 Vol. 119-continued. Burning Fallen Bush, q. 152 Crown Lease Surrenders, m. 887 Dairy Stud Stock, q. 112 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, \- Com. 714 Land Settlement, q. 152 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2B. 760 Lime for Farmers, q. 111 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, Com. 769 Maori Lands Adminstration Bill, m. 914; 3R. 1067 Maori Leaflets, q. 104 Milk-tests in Dairy Factories, q. 113 Payment of Road-labourers, q. 155 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1165 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, Com. 1227 Supply- Class IV., 75, 77 Class XI., 407, 409, 411 Class XXVI., 869 (Public Works Fund) Class XXXI., 869 Veterinary Surgeons, q. 113 Wellington Land Board, q. 104 ORMOND, Hon. J. D., Hawke's Bay, Vol. 116 :- Appointment of New Commandant, Obs. 326 Chairman of Committees, m. 226 Gorse on Rangitaike River, q. 612 Vol. 117 :- Bicyclists in Parliament Grounds, q. 463 Disorder in Committee, Obs. 592 Land for Settlements Act, m. 463, 499 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 502 Lands and Survey Report, q. 290 Sire Horses imported by Government, m. 492 Vol. 118 :- Companies Bill, 3R. 501 Shops and Offices Bill, 38. 262 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 884 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 69. 71 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 650, 702, 834 Local Bills, m. 880 P. PALMER, Mr. J., Ohinemuri, Vol. 116 :- Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 471 Dentists as Jurymen, q. 194 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill. 2R. 344 Statutes Compilation Bill, 28. 478 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 250, 255 
<page>1313</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1353</url>
PALMER, Mr. J .- continued. Vol. 117 :- Answers to Questions, q. 25 Auckland Government Arch, q. 343 Breach of Privilege, m. 642, 653 Colonial Scale of Staffs and Salaries for Pub- lio-school Teachers, m. 144 Eight Hours Bill, Com. 172 Falconer, John, and Others, Rep. Sel. Com. 244 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, 2R. 528 Roads and Railways Expenditure, &c., m. 83 Rhodes Trust Bill, 2R. 239 Waibi Miners' Dispute, q. 12 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 73, 873 Financial Statement, m. 828 Supply-Class II., 702 Vol. 119 :- Accommodation for Select Committees, &c., m. 311 Aubrey's Case, q. 200 Beattie, James, Rep. Sel. Com. 1085 Easton, Herbert E., Rep. Sel. Com. 888 Factories Bill, Com. 340, 343 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, Com. 701 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1241 Ocean Mail-services, m. 523 Paeroa River, q. 200 Supply-Class IV., 73, 74 Waitekauri Public Battery, q. 200 PARATA, Mr. T., Southern Maori, Vol. 116 :-- Landless Natives in South Island, m. 182; q. 191 Native Land Court, q. 190 Rangitane and Ngatikuia Hapus, q. 603 South Island Maoris, q. 391 Vol. 117 :- Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 214 Vol. 118 :- Maori Hostelry at the Bluff, q. 657 Vol. 119 :- Chatham Islands, q. 596 Chatham Islands County Bill, 2R. 575 Maori Census, q. 323 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 990 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 232 Ocean Mail-services, m. 552 Rangitoto Island, q. 598 Reserves for Ngatikuia Tribe, q. 115 Taieri Maori Village, q. 156 . Torotoroa and Taurutu Lagoons, q. 598 PEACOCK, Hon. J. T., Canterbury, Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 1207 Factories Bill, Com. 1007 PERE, Mr. W., Eastern Maori, Vol. 118 :- Native Affairs Committee's Recommenda- tions, q. 653, 654 Vol. 119 :- Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 982 PINKERTON, Hon. D., Otago, Vol. 116 :- Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 103 Imperial Honours, m. 177 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 332 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 463; Com. 492; 3R. 615 Vol. 117 :- Land for Settlements Bill, m. 502 Returned Troopers and Public Health, m. 529 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, m. 527 Shops and Offices Bill, Com. 369, 531, 594 Training-ships, m. 137 Vol. 118 :-- Exportation of Arms Bill, 2R. 662 Kerr, Death of the Hon. J., m. 150 Shops and Offices Bill, Com. 203 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 690 Statutes Compilation Bill, 2R. 689 Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 1207 Apology, Obs. 870 Borough of Mornington Tramways Bill, 2R. 874 Disorder in Committee, m. 443 Dunedin Waterworks Extension Bill, 2R. 877 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 66, 69, 70, 72 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, 3R. 1083 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 731, 834 PIRANI, Mr. F., Palmerston, Vol. 116 :- Accident Insurance Rates, q. 187 Bank of New Zealand, m. 231, 233 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 475 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 487 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 447, 458 Hokitika Harbour Board Loan, q. 405 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 687, 689 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, q. 401 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 338 Kelvin Grove, Flag-station at, q. 594 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 537 ; Com. 572 ; m. 575; Com. 610, 611 ; Cons. of Amend. 618, 619 ; 3R. 649 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2. 205 Looney, Thomas, q. 407 New Commandant of the Forces, m. 280 Payment of Railway Ballast-gangs, q. 405 Railway-fares, q. 596 
<page>1314</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1354</url>
PIRANI, Mr. F .- continued. Vol. 116-continued. Referendum Bill, Com. 364; Cons. of Amend. 495, 499 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 300 ; Com. 486 Taranaki Dairy School, q. 411 Trustee Bill, 2R. 361 Wellington Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 466 Vol. 117 :- Bonus for Preserved Milk, q. 28 Breach of Privilege, m. 649, 659 Colonial Scale of Staffs and Salaries for Pub- lic-school Teachers, m. 144 Companies Bill, 2R. 419 Completion of Valuation-rolls, q. 95 Conciliation Boards, m. 357 Counties Bill, 2R. 182 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, 2R. 70 Four-per-cent. Debenture Loan, m. 639, 641 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 217 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 388, Com. 441, 442 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 606 Local Bodies' Valuations, q. 94 Local Government Bill Committee, m. 297 Makohine Viaduct, m. 351 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 48 Privil ge, q. 83, 87 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 544, 548, 552 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 233 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 121, 132 Supply-Class I., 462 Supreme Court Returns, m. 82 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 158 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill. 3R. 36 Woodville County Bill, m. 359 Vol. 118 :- Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, 2R. 602 Breach of Privilege, m. 75, 272, 273, 275, 368, 376, 380, 427, 452 Commandant of the Forces, q. 612 Cook Islands, m. 644 Defence Report, m. 461 Departmental Statements in Hansard, m. 226 Financial Statement, m. 126 Mackenzie and Geraldine Counties Bound- aries Alteration Bill, m. 619 Ministers' Travelling-allowances, q. 613 Morning Sittings, m. 478 Old-age Pensions, m. 607 Privilege, m. 467 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), Com. 616, 617 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, Cons. of Amend. 617 Supply- Class I., 532, 537, 538, 548, 550, 555, 556, 578 PIRANI, Mr. F .- continued. Vol. 118-continued. Supply-continued. Class II., 582, 584, 585, 586, 666, 667, 668 &c., 674, 678 &c., 700, 705, 706, 709, 714 m. 694 Unopposed Returns, m. 609 Wednesday Sittings, m. 664 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 789, 790, 791; 2R. 821 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, Com. 359 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 776 Diack's Petition, m. 44 Factories Bil, Com. 340 Food Trusts Bill, Int. 840 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, m. 907 ; 2R. 1032; Com. 1033 Hokitika Harbour Board Endowment Bill, 2R. 751 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 52 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), mn. 856, 858 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 167, 169 ; 3R. 174, 176; m. 1042 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 756, 758 Local Bills, m. 852 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 764 ; Com. 767. 768 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 914, 996; 3R. 1072 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 725 Ministerial Expenses, m. 1021, 1024 Native Civil List, m. 887 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1196 New Zealand Railways, m. 1160 North Island Main Trunk Railway, Obs. 895 Ocean Mail-services, m. 534 Officers of Parliament, q. 4 Old-age Pensions Bill, Com. 679; m. 1162. 1163 Palmerston North Post-office, 9. 906 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 3R. 716 Patea Electoral Roll. m. 894 Patea Election, m. 392 Payment of Interest on £500,000 New Zea- land Debentures invested by Public Trus- tee, m. 451 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1103, 1142: Com. 1146, 1147, 1148 Petition re Maori Degradation, Obs. 393, 390, 391 Public Debt, m. 148 Public Health Bill, Int. 1188 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R 629 ; Com. 781 ; 3R. 782 Railway Classification and Superannuation. m. 60 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1164 Review of Reviews, m. 746, 749, 750 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 6, 17, 13; 25. 123, 143 ; 3R. 211, 215 School Attendance Bill, 2R. 279; 3R. 1168 State Coal-mines Bill, 3R. 912 Supply- Class II., 18, 24, 26, 29, 34, 36, 38 Class III., 64, 65 Class IV., 75, 76, 77, 79, 81, 99 Class V., 91, 93 
<page>1315</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1355</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Supply-continued. Class VI., 248, 249, 255 Class VII., 256, 257 Class VIII., 257, 259, 260 Class XI., 406, 411, 412, 413 Class XIV., 413, 418, 430, 431, 432, 433 Teachers' and Civil Service Examinations, m. 745 Timber Export Bill, Int. 1197 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1034 Vaile Stage Railway System, m. 788 Victoria College Site Bill, Com. 1188 PITT, Hon. Colonel, Nelson, Vol. 116 :- Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 106 Companies Bill, 2R. 371 Defence Department, m. 178 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 3R. 328 Tobacco-smoking by Youths, q. 174 Vol. 117 :- Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 338; 3R. 361 ; m. 365 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 177 Referendum Bill, 2R. 174 Shops and Offices Bill, Com. 431 State-school Children Drill Bill, 2R. 292 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, m. 73 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 400 ; 3R. 588, 589, 692 Companies Bill, Com. 337 ; 3R. 501 Education Boards Election Bill, 2R. 642 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 2R. 593 Physical Drill in Public and Native Schools Bill, 3R. 588 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 689, 691 Vol. 119 :- Cadet Corps of Collegiate and Secondary Schools, q. 871 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, 2R. 875 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 1080 Defence Department, q. 1 Egmont County Bill (No. 2), 2R. 876 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 70, 71,72 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 834 Land Transfer Assurance Fund, m. 93, 94 "Monowai," The Missing Steamer, q. 702 Old-age Pensions Bill, Com. 886 Public Trust Office Bill, 2R. 1172 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, Com. 95 Trustee Amendment Bill, m. 832 R. REEVES, Hon. R. H. J., Nelson, Vol. 116 :- Chairman of Committees, m. 227, 228 Vol. 116-continned. Checking Railway Luggage, q. 103, 107 Colonial Bank Liquidation, m. 582 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 276, 277 Gold-mining Industry, q. 665 Inspection of Private Schools, m. 613 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 332 Training-ships, q. 577 Victoria College Site, q. 577 Young Persons Protection Bill, 3R. 615 Vol. 117 :- Adjournment, m. 532 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 295 Land for Settlements Bill, 3R. 361 Referendum Bill, 2R. 9 Training-ships, m. 133 Victoria College, q. 593 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 406, 588 Companies Bill, Com. 336, 460 Election of Chairman of Committees, q. 454 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 2R. 590, 593 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, 2R. 689 Vaccination, m. 331 Vol. 119 :-- Appropriation Bill, 3R. 1206, 1207 Assembly Library, m. 309 Blackwater River Gold-dredging Company, m. 180 Bonar, Hon. Mr., Death of the, m. 1200 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, Com. 1085 Coal-mines Bill, Com. 1151 Disorder in Committee, m. 443 Factories Bill, Com. 1075 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 3R. 945 Labour Day, q. 235 Local Bills, m. 883 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 879 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, m. 265, 266 ; Com. 445 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 263, 241 ; Recom. 445 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1202 Old-age Pensions Bill, Recom. 946 Public Works Bill, Com. 1204; m. 1205 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, Com. 272 Victoria College, m. 1199 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1204 RHODES, Mr. R. H., Ellesmere, Vol. 116 :- Rifles for Volunteers and Clubs, q. 189 Vol. 117 :- Counties Bill, 2R. 189 Ellesmere, Lake, q. 93 Imported Stud Stock, q. 314 Rhodes Trust Bill, 2R. 238, 240 Rifles for Volunteer Officers, q. 479 Southbridge Branch Trains, q. 300 
<page>1316</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1356</url>
Vol. 118 :- " General Orders," New Zealand Forces, q. 609 Postal Arrangements at Kaituna, q. 690 Supply-Class II., 705 Vol. 119 :- Levels and Waimate Counties Boundaries Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 40 ; 2R. 752 Little River and Lincoln Railway, q. 163 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1165 Supply- Class II., 18, 21, 24 Class XXXI., 869 (Public Works Fund) RIGG, Hon. J., Wellington, Vol. 116 :- Chairman of Committees, m. 228, 229 Vol. 117 :- Library Recess Committee Report, q. 360 Referendum Bill, 2R. 11 Shops and Offices Bill, Com. 421 Vol. 118 :-- Cigarette-smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, Com. 693 Library Accommodation, m. 687 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 689 Vol. 119 :- Assembly Library, m. 308, 309 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 1078 Disorder in Committee, m. 444 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 72 Factories Bill, Com. 1006, 1075; Cons. of Amend. 1170, 1171 ; Conf. 1200 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, 9. 307 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 703, 745, 786, 787, 788; m. 833; 3R. 930, 945 Labour Day, q. 235 Library, Rep. Sel. Com. 1200 Local Bills, m. 883 Maori Councils Bill, 2R. 835 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 877 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 184 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 837; Com. 886 Watson Fine of £500, q. 729 RUSSELL, Mr. G. W., Riccarton, Vol. 116 :- Addington Railway-station, q. 591 Address in Reply, m. 50 Casual Railway-hands, q. 591 Chinese Immigrants Bill, Com. 393 Counties Bill, m. 31 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 470 Disqualification Act, q. 241 District Health Officers, q. 32 Eight Hours Bill, 2B. 803, 490 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 440 Vol. 116-continued. Employés in Railway Workshops, q. 591 Imprest Supply Bill, m. 17 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 338 Islington, Hornby, and Templeton Railway Services, q. 591 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 516, 572; 3B. 657 Libel Law, q. 494 New Commandant of the Forces, m. 280 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 483 Periodical Railway Returns, q. 591 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 271 Portfolios and Departments of Ministers, q. 186 Railway Employés' Classification, q. 591 Referendum Bill, 2R. 222 Woodville County Bill, 2R. 467 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 251 \- -- Vol. 117 :- Asiatic Restriction, q. 248 Breach of Privilege, m. 649, 660 Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 438 Completion of Valuation-rolls, q. 96 Counties Bill, 2R. 186 Divorce Bill, 2R. 115 Eight Hours Bill, Com. 172 Financial Statement, m. 669 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 192, 201, 222; Com. 491 ; Cons. of Amend. 574 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 392, 396 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 601, 608 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 54 Police Offences Bill, m. 254 Promissory Oaths Bill, 2R. 396 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 560 Railway Department Revenue, m. 83 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 228 Representation Bill, 2R. 110 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 132 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 106 Supply-Class I., 462 Teachers' Salaries Commission, q. 191 Templeton Domain Board Empowering Bill, 2R. 147 Unofficial Passengers in Government Steamers, q. 516 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 405 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 421, 444 Cycle Boards Bill, Com. 618 Eight Hours Bill, Com. 618 Financial Statement, m. 524 President MoKinley: Attempted Assassina- tion, m. 464 Privilege Tickets, q. 690 Supply- Class I., 578, 579, 580 Class II., 585, 586, 684, 696, 707, 708, 714 Teachers' Salaries, q. 659 
<page>1317</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1357</url>
RUSSELL, Mr. G. W .- continued. . Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, m. 789 ; 2R. 800 Appropriation Bill, 2R. 1253 Badger, Wilfred, Rep. Sel. Com. 277 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, 2R. 282 Commonwealth Tariff, q. 586, 594 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 294 ; m. 1178 Criminal Code Bill, Com. 1164 Despatches between Governor and Home Authorities, q. 587 Diack's Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 44 Factories Bill, Com. 339 ; 3R. 866 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 354 Forest Gate Estate, q. 589 Government Railways Department Classifica- tion Bill, q. 750 Halswell Post-office, q. 906 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Elec- tion Bill, 2R. 565 Imported Rolling-stock, q. 855 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), m. 856 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 1044 Kapuatohe and Kaimahi Blocks, q. 898 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 754, 761 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, 2R. 1235 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 2R. 557 ; m. 974 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1091, 1229 Ministerial Expenses, m. 1021, 1024 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1191 New Zealand Ensign Bill, 2R. 576 North Island Main Trunk Railway, Obs. 895 Ocean Mail-services, m. 479, 552, 555 Old-age Pensions Bill, Com. 680; Cons. of Amend. 1163 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 558; 3R. 718 Payment of Members Bill, Com. 1148, 1149 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 618 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 56 Representation of New Zealand at the King's Coronation, q. 901 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 9 ; 2R. 128 State Coal-mines Bill, 2R. 690, 700; m. 1176 Supply- Class II., 20, 1244, 1246, 1250 Class III., 62, 63 Class VI., 247, 253, 255 Class VIII., 258, 259, 261 Class X., 401, 405 Class XI., 406, 408 Class XIV., 416, 417, 418, 1249 Class XV., 438 Class XVI., 439, 440, 1249 Class XXI., 862 (Public Works Fund) Class XXII., 865, 866 Class XXV., 868 Class XXVI., 868 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1215 ; Com. 1219 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1035 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, Int. 848 RUSSELL, Captain W. R., Hawke's Bay, Vol. 116 :- Alleged Misconduct of Volunteers at Wood- ville, q. 379 Annexation of Fiji, q. 242, 243 Commandant of the Forces, q. 383 Death of Queen Victoria, m. 7 District Courts Bill, 2B. 397 Fiji, m. 588, 589 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 13, 20 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 694 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 495; 2R. 508, 512; Com. 575 ; m. 576; 3R. 630 Ministers' Travelling expenses, q. 378 Native Affairs Committee Petitions, m. 508 O'Brien, Sir G., and New Zealand, q. 552 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 261 Referendum Bill, 2R. 214; Com. 864, 893 Troopship " Tagus," Obs. 235 Vaile's Railway Stage System, Obs. 374 Vol. 117 :- Coal-mines: Report of Royal Commission, m. 241 Counties Bill, 2R. 180 Death of Sir John Mckenzie, m. 286 Death of the Dowager Empress of Germany, m. 284 Financial Statement, q. 246; m. 617 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 208 ; Com. 491 ; Cons. of Amend. 572 Hastings Railway-station, q. 512 Kaikoura North Railway-station, q. 512 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 491 Maori History and Art, q. 247 Notices of Motion, m. 532 Order of Business, Obs. 373 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 550 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 224 Supply-Class I., 462 Woodville County Bill, m. 359 Vol. 118 :- Commandant of the Forces, q. 151 Departmental Returns, m. 204 Departmental Statements in Hansard, m. 224 Financial Statement, m. 46, 170 Morning Sittings, m. 471 Postponement of Questions, m. 468 President MoKinley : Attempted Assassina- tion, m. 463 Privilege, m. 465 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, Com. 790 ; 2R. 792 Clive Rifle Volunteers, q. 591 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 3B. 661; m. 1177 Forest Gate Estate, q. 362 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 567 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 762 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, 2B. 1230 
<page>1318</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1358</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 914, 986; 3R. 1068 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 724 Ministerial Expenses, m. 1020 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, Com. 1221 New Business after Midnight, Obs. 4 New Zealand Railways, m. 1159 Ocean Mail-services, m. 460, 488, 549 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 675 Order of Business, Obs. 602 Patea Election, m. 391. 393, 396, 510 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1125 Public Trust Office Bill, 2R. 574 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1164 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, m. 947, 1208 ; Com. 1226 Supply- Class IV., 79 Class XI., 407 Class XII., 436 Class XIV., 428 Class XVI., 439 Class XXI., 863 (Public Works Fund) Class XXII., 866 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1210 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1034 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1186 S. SCOTLAND, Hon. H., Taranaki,  Vol. 116 :- Adjournment, m. 105 Appointment of the New Commandant, Obs. 326 Chairman of Committees, m. 226, 227 Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 105 Colonial Bank Liquidation, m. 580 Companies Bill, 2R. 370 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 276 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 180 Imperial Honours, m. 175, 178 Law Amendment Bill, 2R. 582 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 328, 330 Vaccination, m. 667 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 460 Vol. 117 :- Returned Troopers and Public Health, m. 530 Referendum Bill, 2R. 7, 175 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, Rep. Sel. Com. 527 Shops and Offices Bill, Adj. Deb. 425 State-school Children Drill Bill, 2R. 292 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, m. 75 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 404, 588 Companies Bill, m. 338 President Mckinley : Attempted Assassina- . tion, m. 400 Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 651 Assembly Library, m. 308 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, 2R. 875 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2B. 1077 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 832 Labour Day, q. 235 Library, Assembly, m. 308 Maori Antiquities Bill, 2R. 349 Shops and Shop-assistante Bill, m. 96; q. 651 Whakapuaka Block, m. 872 SEDDON, Mr. R. J., P.C., Westland (Premier, Colonial Treasurer, Minister of Labour, and Minister of Defence), Vol. 116 :- Accident Insurance Rates, q. 187 Acquisition of Estates in Hawke's Bay, q. 402 Address in Reply, m. 51, 66, 90 Adjournment, m. 419 Alleged Misconduct of Volunteers, q. 244, 378 Annexation of Fiji, q. 242 Appeal from Land and Income Assessment, q. 382 Ashburton County Council Empowering Bill, 2R. 374 Assassination of King Humbert, m. 183 Bank of New Zealand, m. 231, 232, 233 Berry, Rev. Joseph, q. 401 Bible- reading in Schools, q. 237, 238 Bluecliffs Estate, q 380 Book-keeping of Local Bodies, q. 400 Chinese Immigrants Bill, 2R. 361 ; Com. 393 City of Christchurch Electorate, m. 30 Close Settlement in Wanganul District. 9. 233 Commandant of the Forces, m. 279, 250, 281 ; q. 383 Contingents on the Steamer "Tagus," Obs. 363 Counties Bill, Int. 12 ; m. 31, 586 Customs Duties, q. 242 Death of Queen Victoria, m. 6, 7, 183 Disqualification Act, q. 241, 242 District Courts Bill, 2R. 395, 398 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 305, 321 ; q. 384 Elective Executive Bill, 2B. 436, 440, 443, 458, 459 Expiring Laws Continuance Bill, 1R. 13 Exportation of Arms Bill, 2R. 393 Farmers' Union, Obs. 376 Federation Commission Report, q. 198 Fiji, q. 375, 552 ; m. 588, 589 Glenham Estate, q. 35 Government Whip, Obs. 376 Heddon Bush Estate, q. 377 Hotchkiss Guns, q. 34 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 13, 15. 22: 2R. 24 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 684, 686, 669. 694; 3R. 695 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, q. 401 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill. 2R. 333, 341, 347, 355 ; m. 359 Kaipara Flats-Wellsford Railway, q. 33 
<page>1319</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1359</url>
SEDDON, Mr. R. J., P.C .- continued. Vol. 116-continued. Land for Settlements Bill, m. 495 ; 2R. 508, 516, 567, 571, 572, 573; Com. 574, 575; Obs. 576; Com. 610, 611 ; m. 616, 619, 620 ; Com. 620; 3R. 662, 664 Land for Settlement in the King-country, q. 192 Libel Bill, q. 494 Licensing Act, q. 381 Lincoln Agricultural College, q. 378 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 199, 208 Local Boards for Government Advances, q. 382 Local Bodies' Loans, q. 379 Local Option Poll in King-country, q. 185 Lower Road to Seatoun, q. 240 Mangonui, q. 381 Member for Tuapeka, Leave of Absence for, m. 374 Military Drill in Schools, q. 241 Ministers' Travelling-expenses, q. 378 New Commandant of the Forces, m. 279, 280, 281 "Newtown Park Scandal," q. 34 New Zealand Ensign, q. 239 New Zealand Ensign Bill, q. 13 O'Brien, Sir G., and New Zealand, q. 552 Old-age Pensions, q. 186 Old-age Pensions Regulations, m. 13 Opium Importations, q. 383 Overcoats for Volunteers, q. 190 Patea Electorate, m. 30 Portfolios and Departments of Ministers, q. 187 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, 2R. 587 Proclamation of the King, q. 236 R bates to Crown Tenants, q. 188 Referendum Bill, 2R. 212; Adj. Deb. 266; Com. 363, 364, 393 ; m. 495, 497; 3R. 507 Returned Troopers, q. 379 Returned Troopers' Certificates of Discharge, q. 401 Rifles for Volunteers and Clubs, q. 189 Rodney Electorate, q. 383 Roxburgh Estate, q. 240 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 285, 301 State Fire Insurance Bill, Int. 182 State Note-issue. q. 380 Surveyor-General, q. 186 Training of Volunteers, q. 400 Treatment of Cadets at Christchurob, q. 196 Troopship " Tagus," Obs. 234, 236 Trustee Bill, 2R. 360, 361 Unpresented Returns, q. 240 Volunteer Uniforms, q. 380 Volunteers' Ammunition, q. 377 Waimahaka-Tokonui Railway, q. 33 Wairarapa Land for Settlement, q. 383, 384 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, q. 381 Vol. 117 :- Ammunition for .303 Rifles, q. 477 Ammunition for Volunteers, q. 479 Answers to Questions, q. 25 SEDDON, Mr. R. J., P.C .- continued. Vol. 117-continued. Arbitration Court, q. 89 Ashburton Drill-shed, q. 21 Asiatic Restriction, q. 249 Auckland Drill-shed, q. 478 Australasian Squadron, q. 481 Bicycles for Civil Service, q. 15 Bonus for Preserved Milk, q. 28 Cambridge Domain, q. 253 Cemetery Trustees Validation and Appoint- ment Bill, m. 240 Close Settlement in Tuapeka District, q. 25 Coal-mines Bill, Int. 532 Coal-mines : Report of Royal Commission, m. 241, 243 Colonial-made Saddlery for New Zealand Troops, q. 489 Colonial Scale of Staffs and Salaries for Public-school Teachers, m. 144 Compensation to Troopers for Loss of Horses, q. 20 Conciliation Boards, m. 353 ; q. 480, 510 Cook Islands Native Land Court, q. 253 Coror ation of His Majesty, q. 26 Counties Bill, 2R. 178, 181, 185, 187 ; m. 190 Criminal Assaults on Women and Children, q. 488 Cross's Property, Mr., q. 478 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate, q. 253 Defence, q. 483 Delayed Questions, q. 247 Dineen, M. D., q. 474 Distress for Rent Bill, q. 29 Divorce Bill, 2R. 113, 120 Dunedin Public Art Gallery, q. 481 East Coast Land Settlements Estates, q. 24 Empress of Germany, Death of the Dowager, m. 283, 284, 296 Encouraging Population, q. 476 Fiji, q. 89; m. 296; q. 297, 473 Financial Statement, q. 246 ; m. 443, 637 Flour-millers' Association, q. 480 Garrison Artillery Officer, q. 20 Gasworks Compulsory Purchasing, q. 250 Government and Ocean Accident Insurance Premiums, q. 253 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 191, 193, 198; Com. 491 ; Cons. of Amend. 569, 577, 588 Government Works in Hawke's Bay, q. 477 Governor of Fiji's Speech, q. 89 Government Life Insurance Loans, q. 488 Hotel Licenses, q. 251 Immigration of Domestic Servants, q. 20 Imperial or Colonial Naval Reserve, q. 482 Imperial Trade Zollverein, q. 14 Importation of Saddlery, q. 13 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 604, 606, 607; 3R. 613 "Imprisonment for Debt Limitation Act, 1900," q. 27 Inebriates' Institutions, q. 19 Kaikoura Mounted Rifles, q. 18 Land for Settlements Bill, Cons. of Amend. 490 Large Estates, Return re, q. 485 Law Consolidation, q. 17 Licensing Laws, q. 248 
<page>1320</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1360</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Liquor-selling in King-country, q. 14 Local Government Bill Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 297 McDonnell, The late Constable L., Rep. Sel. Com. 534 Mackenzie and Duntroon Rifles, q. 16 MoKenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 280, 285, 289 Mangatoro Estate, q. 16, 90 Maori History and Art, q. 247, 248 Masterton Cadet Corps and Rifle Club, q. 475 Matakanui Lands for Settlement, q. 252 Members of Returned Contingents, q. 89 Merrivale Estate, q. 473 Midland Railway Debenture-holders, q. 18 Military Pensions Board, q. 474 Military Pensions Extension Aot, q. 481 Mortgage-tax, q. 22 Municipal Corporations Aot, q. 250 " Municipal Corporations Act, 1900," q. 486 Municipal Markets, q. 21 New Zealand Ensign Bill, q. 88 Notices of Motion, Obs. 532 O'Connor, Michael, q. 24 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 504, 506 Old Soldiers' and Sailors' Claims, q. 251 Old Soldiers' Claims, q. 90 Order of Business, Obs. 373 Passages to Great Britain for New Zealand Troopers, q. 31 Passenger Steamers between Australia and New Zealand, q. 13 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 47, 48; Com. 145  Payment of Members, q. 29 Police Offences Bill, Cons. of Amend. 254 Privilege, Obs. 86 Public Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 536, 542, 544, 548, 549, 552, 553, 558 Publio Servants and Local Bodies, q. 18 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 222, 227, 331, 334 Removal of Licenses, q. 28 Representation Bill, 2B. 111 Returned Troopers, q. 476, 483 Returned Troopers' Fare from Sydney, q. 88 Returned Troopers' Pay, q. 487 Rhodes Trust Bill, 2R. 238 Rifle Clubs, q. 17, 252 Rifle-ranges, q. 482 Rifles for Volunteer Officers, q. 479 Rifle Team for Bisley Meeting, q. 475 Rotorua Town Council Validation and Ex- tension Bill, 2R. 617 Royal Visit, Obs. 238 Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Women and Children, q. 486 Silverstream Publio Road, q. 17 State Coal-mines, q. 251 State Gold-mining and Issue of Sovereigns, q.489 Statutes Revision Committee, m. 12 Stoke Orphanage, q. 250, 484, 485 Submarine-mining Boat, q. 19 Supply-Class I., 462, 463 " Sweating," q. 479 Teachers' Salaries Commission, q. 191 Vol. 117-continued. Unauthorised Expenditure, q. 297 Volunteers' Lost Rifles, q. 250 Volunteer Regulations, q. 19 Waihi Miners' Dispute, q. 13 Waitaki Mounted Rifles, q. 480 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, m. 245, 246 Wellington Harbour Board, q. 30 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 32, 38, 45 Wellington-Manawatu Railway, q. 22 Woodville Refreshment-room, q. 25 Woodville Refreshment-rooms Scandal, q. 478 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, q. 15, 31, 509 Vol. 118 :- Alcoholic Liquor Sale, q. 622 Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, m. 597, 605, 606 Auckland-Manukau Canal, g. 612 Australasian Chamber of Commerce, q. 620 Breach of Privilege, m. 271, 274, 276, 341, 364, 372, 377, 384, 393, 417, 434, 437, 440, 448, 466, 506 Burns, The late Mr. A. J., m. 561 Carbines for Cadet Corps, q. 620 Commandant of the Forces, q. 151, 612 Cook Islands, Obs. 644 Co-operative Workmen, q. 614 Cost of Visit of Imperial and Indian Troops and Royal Visit, q. 619 Defence Report, m. 461 Departmental Returns, m. 204, 205, 206 Early Records of the Colony, q. 621 Exclusion of Strangers, q. 151 Financial Statement, m. 148, 170, 325, 328, 514, 520 Fraser, The late Colonel, m. 562 Gisborne Appointment to Upper House, q. 623 Government Loans to Local Bodies Act, q. 611 Hansard, m. 634 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 646 Licensing Bill, 1R. 644, 646 Liquor Licenses in King-country, q. 614 Mackenzie, The late Mr. M. J. S., m. 560 Maori Carvings and Curios, q. 621 Maria Findt, q. 620 Married Men in Permanent Forces, q. 612 Military Pensions Act, q. 610 Ministers' Travelling-allowances, q. 613 Morning Sittings, m. 470, 480 Newtown Park, q. 615 New Zealand Products in London Market, q. 623 North Canterbury Volunteer Corps, q. 621 Old-age Pensions, m. 607, 608; q. 612 Orderlies at Parliament House, q. 610 Postponement of Questions, m. 467, 469 President MoKinley: Attempted Assassins- tion, m. 339, 462 President Mckinley, Death of, m. 559 President Mckinley, Funeral of, m. 563 Promissory Oaths Bill, m. 696, 640 
<page>1321</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1361</url>
Vol. 118-continued. Queen's Birthday, q. 621 Rates on Crown Leases by County Councils, q. 615 Returned Troopers from South Africa, q. 622 Rifle Clubs, Obs. 634 Serjeant-at-Arms, q. 663 Settlement in Kawhia County, q. 619 " Shorthand Reporters Act, 1900," q. 611 Southland Volunteers, q. 615 Speaker, Mr., Obs. 224 Storage Accommodation for Magazine Rifles and Carbines, q. 610 Supply- Class I., 526, 528, 531, 537, 539, 542, 548, 551, 555, 575, 579, 584, 585 Class II., 668, 674, 675, 678, 681, 706, 707, 711, 714, 716 Unopposed Returns, m. 609 Wednesday Sittings, m. 663, 665, 666 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, q. 614 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, m. 789 ; Com. 790 ; 2R. 807 Ammunition for Volunteers and Rifle Clubs, q. 312 Appointments to Legislative Council, q. 191, 192, 193 Appropriation Bill, 2R. 1263 ; Com. 1268 8R. 1270 Auckland Drill-shed, q. 193 Auckland Rifle-range, q. 193 Boilermakers at Addington Workshops, q. 202 Bonar, Hon. J. A., Death of the, 1220   Bonus for Shale-oil, q. 897 Borough Council Officers' Retiring-allow- ances, q. 190 Burgess Rolls, m. 146 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, 2R. 281, 283 ; 3R. 259 Chatham Islands County Bill, 2R. 575 Christchurch Drill-ball, q. 193 Clive Rifle Volunteers, q. 591 Committees, m. 1003 Commonwealth Tariff, q. 594 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2B. 283, 284, 288, 302, 305; Com. 359; 3R. 668 ; m. 1176, 1178 Coolis Labour at Colonial Sugar Company's Fiji Mills, q. 188 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 769, 779 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, q. 107 Customs Returns, Obs. 73 Debentures under Land for Settlements Con- solidation Act, m. 948, 949 Delaney, Walter, q. 315 Departmental Land and Buildings, q. 318 Despatches between Governor and Home Authorities, q. 587 Diack's Petition, m. 42 Disfranchisement of Wellington, q. 316 Easton, Herbert E., Rep. Sel. Com. 888 Egmont National Park Bill, 2R. 280 Export Duty on Balk Timber, q. 592, 895 Vol. 119-continued. Factories Bill, m. 331, 338; Com. 340, et seq .; 3R. 379, 386; m. 1085; Obs. 1174; m. 1188, 1219 Federal Tariff, q. 588 Federation Commission q. 191 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 355 Food Trusts Bill, m. 841 Forest Gate Estate, q. 362, 590 Forest Planting, q. 318 Gauntlett, Mrs. C. W., q. 587 Hikurangi Volunteer Corps, q. 193 His Excellency the Governor, q. 898 Holmes, Hon. M., M.L.C., Death of the, m. 45 Hokitika Harbour Board Endowment Bill, 2B. 751 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 1R. 46, 53 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), m. 856 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, q. 593 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 166; Com. 168, 169; 3R. 177, 178, 179; m. 1035, 1041 Kapuatohe and Kaimahi Blocks, q. 898 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2B. 753, 760 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, m. 243 Land Boards, q. 588 Long-service Medals, q. 896 Legislative Council Appointments, q. 189, 317, 595, 596 Library Fund, m. 244 Library, Parliamentary, q. 312 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, 2R. 680; 3R. 701 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 762, 764 Lyttelton Forte, q. 192 Mackay, Mrs. James, q. 190 Manawatu Railway, q. 189 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, m. 1230; 2B. 1230, 1236; Com. 1238 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 914, 955 Members of Parliament in Public Positions, q. 589 Messengers and Orderlies, q. 900 Midland Railway Company, Rep. Sel. Com. 1093 Midland Railway, m. 311, 1228, 1229 Military Pensions Bill, Com. 449 ; 2R. 724 Ministerial Expenses, Obs. 1020, et seq. Ministerial Interest in Meat Companies, q. 192 Monday Sittings, m. 187, 188 Money-lenders Bill, m. 513 Morris Tubes, q. 318 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1222 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1180; Rep. Sel. Com. 1190, 1191 ; 2R. 1194 New Business after Midnight, Obs. 4 New Zealand : Colony or State, q. 315 New Zealand Ensign Bill, 2R. 575, 578; Obs. 715 New Zealand Troopers' Horses, q. 194 North Canterbury Volunteer Officers, q. 188 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1243 
<page>1322</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1362</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Nutt, Mrs. L. J., q. 202 Officers of Parlament, Obs. 5 Ocean Mail-services, Com. 547, 549, 552 Old-age Pensions Bill, m. 1162, 1163 Old age Pensions Act, q. 188 Opium Prohibition Bill, 2R. 306 Opposed Returns, q. 316 Order of Business, q. 595; m. 714 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 3R. 716 Parliamentary Library, 9. 312 Parliamentary Session, 1902, q. 1274 Patea Election, Obs. 391 ; m. 394, 510 Patea Election Petition, Obs. 347 Patea Electoral Roll, m. 894 Payment of Interest on £500,000 New Zea- land Debentures invested by Public Trustee, m. 449, 452 Payment of Members B ll, Obs. 510; 2R. 1104, 1142; Com. 1146, 1148 Permanent Artillery Pay, q. 194 Permanent Militia Uniforms, q. 595 Personal Explanation, Obs. 951, et seq. Precedence, q. 319 Principles of Warfare, q. 592 1 Privilege, Obs. 1016, et seq. Produce Markets, q. 203 Public Debt, m. 147, 149 Public scho 1 Teachers' Salaries Bill, q. 587 ; 2R. 602, 634 ; 3R. 782 Publio Trust Office Bill, 2R. 573 ; Com. 1168 Public Service : Particulars re Names, &c., q. 317 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 56, 57  Railway Rates for Timber, q. 202 Ranfurly, Lord, q. 899 Representation of New Zealand at the King's Coronation, q. 901 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, m. 947, 1208 ; Com. 1225 Returned Troopers' Medical Examination, q. 195 Revenue of the Colony, m. 283 Review of Reviews, m. 746 Rifles for Rifle Clubs, q. 318 Royal Review in Christchurch, q. 900 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 5, 6, 15, 16, 17; 2R. 119, 128, 136, 138 et seq. ; Com. 206 ; 3R. 208, 212, 214, 216 School Attendance Bill, 2R. 279, 280 Sir George Grey's Papers, q. 194 State Coal-mines Bill, 2R. 680, 697; Com. 908; 3R. 911 ; m. 1161 ; Com. 1175 Steamers between New Zealand and South Africa, q. 593 South African War, q. 313 Springbank Estate, q. 188 Supplies for Royal Visit, q. 195 Supply- Class II., 18, 23, 24, 25, 27, 38 Class III., 61, 62, 64 Class IV., 73, 78, 90 Class VI., 245, 247, 248, 254 Class IX., 396, et seq. Class X., 402, 404 Class XI., 410 \- Vol. 119-continued. Supply-continued. Class XIV., 413, et seq. Class XXI., 863 (Public Works Fund) Class XXII., 868 Class XXVII., 869 Supplementary Estimates- Class II., 1244, 1246 Class XVI., 1249 Unauthorised Expenditure, 1250, 1251 Teachers' and Civil Service Examination -. q. 745 Thompson, Mr. R., Rep. Sel. Com. 652 Timber Export Bili, m. 1197 ; Com. 1199 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Carnaval and York, m. 1034, 1035 Trustee Bill, m. 573 ; Rep. Sel. Com. 78: m. 859 Unopposed Notices of Motion, q. 97. 99 Victoria College Site Bil', 2R. 1183, 1157: Com. 1240 Volunteer Capitation, q. 203 Waimate High School Cadets, q. 594 Waitaki Mounted Rifles, q. 195 Westland and Nelson Calfields Administra. tion Bill, Com. 1196 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 842, 849 SHRIMSKI, Hon. S. E., Otago, Vol. 116 :- Adjournment, m. 105 Chairman of Committees, m. 226, 227, 228 Checking Passengers' Luggage, m. 105 Companies Bill, 2R. 372 Coroners' Inqueste, m. 459 Death of Queen Victoria, m. 4 Election of Chairman of Committe-s. m. 77 Grand Hotel Fire, Auckland, q. 103 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 1-1 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R 3 !! Queen Victoria, Death of, m. 4 Vaccination, m. 667 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 461 Vol. 117 :- Government Insurance Office, q. 70 Land for Settlements Aot, m. 493 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 337 ; 3R. 301 Returned Troopers and Public Health, m 530 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brott ers, Rep. Sel. Com. 525 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 365, 373 : Com. 595 Statutes Revision Committee, m. 81 Vol. 118 :- Informal Petitions, m. 202 Shops and Offices Bill, 3R. 58 Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, m. 4 Assembly Library, m. 309 Disorder in Committee, Obs. 442, 446 Election of Chairman of Committeer, m. " Labour Day, q. 235, 236 Library, Assembly, m. 309 Local Bills, m. 881 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, m. 95 ; 3R. :: 
<page>1323</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1363</url>
Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 584 Adjournment, m. 105 Chairman of Committees, m. 228 Checking Railway Luggage, q. 103 ; m. 105, 108 Colonial Bank Liquidation, m. 577, 582 Companies Bill, 2R. 367 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 278 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 181; Com. 278 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 462 ; m. 583 Vol. 117 :- Land for Settlements Act, m. 496 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 338 ; 3R. 362 Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 283 Referendum Bill, 2R. 10 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, Rep. Sel. Com. 524, 528 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 368 ; Adj. Deb. 432 Vol. 118 :- Law Amendment Bill, m. 688 Vol. 119 :-- Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 71, 73 Factories Bill, Com. 1008; m. 1171, 1201 Inch-Clutha Road, River, and Drainage Bill, 2R. 876 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill,  2R. 783 ; 3R. 926, 930, 944 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 878 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 182, 183; Com. 241, 351, 446 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 272 SMITH, Mr. G. J., City of Christchurch, Vol. 117 :- Conciliation Boards, m. 359 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 213 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 383 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, Cons. of Amend., 3R. 436 Publico Accounts Committee, Rep. Sel. Com. 566 Railway Concessions to Telegraph Linemen, q. 511 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 262 Telegraph Messengers, q. 513 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 448 Conciliation and Arbitration for Railway Employés, q. 1 Supply-Class II., 671, 675, 695, 713, 716 Wednesday Sittings, m. 664 Vol. 119 :- Appointments to Legislative Council, q. 192 Badger, Wilfred, m. 277 Boilermakers at Addington Workshops, q. 202 Christchurch Drill-ball, q. 193 Vol. 119-continued. Christchurch-Lyttelton Railway Rates, q. 161, 162 City of Christchurch Electric Power and Loan Empowering Bill, Com. 752 Factories Bill, m. 336; Com. 340, 344, 345; m. 346 Government Railways Department Classifica. tion Bill, Com. 907 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 167, 168; m. 1038 Ocean Mail-services, Com. 550, 551 ; m. 554 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 608 Shipping and Seamen Bill, m. 278 Supply- Class II., 21, 29, 35 Class III., 62 Class V., 90, 91, 92 Class XI., 407 Class XIV., 417 Class XVI., 441 Class XXXII., 870 (Public Works Fund) Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1035 SMITH, Hon. W. C., Hawke's Bay, Vol. 116 :- Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, 2R. 585 Chairman of Committees, m. 229 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 277 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 3R. 366 Vaccination, m. 668 Vol. 117 :- Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 294, 295 New Hebrides Islands, q. 173 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 2R. 294 Woodville County Bill, 2R. 237 Vol. 118 :-- Cigarette - smoking by Youths Probibition Bill, 2R. 588 Companies Bill, 3R. 502 Education Boards Election Bill, m. 642 Vol. 119 :- Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 67, 71,72 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 1075 SPEAKER, Hon. the (Sir H. J. Miller, Kt.), Otago Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, Obs. 62 Address to the King, Obs. 25 · Chairman of Committees, m. 228 Checking Railway Luggage, q. 103 Death of Queen Victoria, Obs. 2 Imperial Honours, m. 177 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 330 Queen Victoria, Death of, Obs. 2 Swearing.in of Members, Obs. 1 Vaccination, m. 668 Vol. 117 :- Bicyclists in Parliament Grounds, q. 463 Disorder in Committee, m. 592, 593 
<page>1324</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1364</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Empress of Germany, Death of the Dowager, m. 289 Referendum Bill, Adj. Deb. 139 Returned Troopers and Public Health, m. 530 Vol. 118 :- Companies Bill, 3R. 502 Election of Chairman of Committees, q. 454 Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, Obs. 149 Vol. 119 :- Disorder in Committee, Obs. 442, 445, 447 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 71 SPEAKER, Mr. (Sir G. M. O'Rorke, Kt.), Manu- kau, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 56; Obs. 183 Bible-reading in Schools, q. 237 Counties Bill, m. 32 Death of Queen Victoria, Obs. 5 Deceased Husband's Brother Marriage Bill, Obs. 13 District Courts Bill, 2R. 399 Elective Executive Bill, q. 458 Farmers' Union, Obe. 376 Fiji, q. 375 ; m. 589 Governor's Salary and Allowances Bill, Obs. 13 Governor's Speech, Obr. 13 Hansard Reprints, q. 600 Hours of Sitting, Obs. 279, 374 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 15, 18 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), 3R. 694 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 358, 359 Land for Settlements Bill, Obs. 495; 2R. 508; Obs. 576 ; m. 619 Libel Law, q. 494 Northern Maori District, Obs. 5 Order of Business, Obs. 374 P.dlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 483 Referendum Bill, m. 495 ; 3R. 507 Resignation of Members, Obs. 5 Swearing-in of Members, Obs. 4 Taranaki Dairy School, q. 411 Treatment of Cadets at Christchurch, q. 196 Vaile's Railway Stage System, Obs. 374 Vol. 117 :- Counties Bill, 2R. 181, 185, 187 Empress of Germany, Death of the Dowager, m. 296 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, m. 441 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 56 Public Health Bill, Cons. of Amend. 375 Privilege, Obs. 85, 87 Royal Visit, Obs. 238 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 7, 105 Speaker, Mr., q. 191 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2B. 151, 154, 162 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 31, 47 Vol. 116 :- Chinese Immigrants Bill, 2R. 493, 494 Cyanide Process Extension Bill, 2R. 492 Vol. 117 :- Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 176 STEVENS, Mr. J., Manawatu, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 72, 173 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 321 Levin Post-office, q. 594 Wellington Harbour Board Bill, 2B. 466 Vol. 117 :- Bull's Post-office, 9. 91 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, Cons. of Amend. 585, 592 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 227 Sanatorium for Consumptives, q. 306 Vol. 118 :- Supply-Class I., 546 Vol. 119 :- Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), m. 857 Nutt, Mrs. L. J., q. 202 Report of the Department of Agriculture, q. 156 Sanatorium at Turakina, q. 108 STEWARD, Major W. J., Waitaki, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply. m. 87 Bluecliffs Estate, q. 380 Counties Bill, Int. 13 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 322 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 420, 459 Fairlie Railway-platform, q. 246 Fish-hatcheries, q. 184 Glenavy Station-yard, q. 591 Glenavy, Morven, Willowbridge, and Borton's Railway-sheds, q. 385 Kapua Settlement, q. 607 Kurow Public Buildings, q. 403, 404 Morven Wesleyan Church Site, q. 607 Mortgages, m. 182 Mount Cook Hermitage, q. 384 Oamaru-Kurow Railway, q. 245 Pareora Water-race, q. 608 Police Protection at St. Andrew's, q. 408 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 258 Railway Officers' Classification, q. 386 Rivers Commission Report, q. 195 St. Andrew's Telegraph-office, q. 245 Small-birds Nuisance Bill, q. 194 Statutes Compilation Bill, 2R. 477, 479 Tasman River, q. 183 Waikakahi and Pareora Roads and Bridgee. q. 606 Waimate Courthouse, q. 408 Willowbridge and Uxbridge Railway-stations, q. 404 
<page>1325</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1365</url>
Vol. 117 :- Awamoko Stream, q. 93 Breach of Privilege, m. 656 Chapman, Mr. A. H., q. 102 Copyright Act, q. 298 Divorce Bill, 2R. 116 Health Officer for Waimate, q. 297 Inebriates' Institutions, q. 19 Infant Mortality : Population, q. 300 Mackenzie and Duntroon Rifles, q. 16 Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 287 McLean's Railway-station, q. 90 Military Pensions Extension Act, q. 490 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 381 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 51 Penny Postage for Newspapers, q. 92 Police Offences Bill, Cons. of Amend. 254 Porter, Ralph, q. 489 Public Health Bill, Cons. of Amend. 379 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 258, 270 Redcliff and Takitu Small Grazing-run, q. 102 River-beds, q. 101, 102 Telephone at Kimbell, q. 91 Timaru Harbour Board District and Harbour Board Bill, Int. 342; 1R. 342 Waimate High School Cadet Corps, q. 99 Waitaki Mounted Rifles, q. 480 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 76, 271, 274, 354, 450 Financial Statement, m. 219, 226, 278 Windsor-Livingstone Railway, q. 633  Vol. 119 :- Adjournment, Obs. 1275 Advances to Settlers Valuation-fees, q. 157 Easton, Herbert E., Rep. Sel. Com. 888 #cc-zero Fair Rent Bill, q. 112 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 353 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, in. 167 Kelsey's Bush, q. 114 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, m. 243 Levels and Waimate Counties Boundaries Alteration Bill, 2R. 752 Maerewhenua Bridge, q. 114 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 227 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 675 Otekaike Estate, q. 115 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, m. 947 Returned Troopers' Medical Examination, q. 195 Springbank Estate, q. 188 Unopposed Notices of Motion, q. 99 Waikakahi, q. 109 Waimate Courthouse, q. 195 Waimate High School Cadets, q. 594 Waimate Hospital District Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 453 Waitaki Mounted Rifles, q. 195 SYMES, Mr. W., Egmont, Vol. 116 :- Alleged Misconduct of Volunteers, Obs. 244 ; q. 378 iv-116-119. Vol. 116-continued. Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, m. 30 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 310 Mount Egmont Railway, q. 597 Railway-rates in North and South Islands, q. 244 Sanatorium at Mount Egmont, q. 245 Stock-loading Yards at Inglewood, q. 590 Surveyors' Chainmen, q. 412 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 653 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate, q. 253 Government and Ocean Accident Insurance Premiums, q. 253 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 382 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 503, 506, 508 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), 2R. 323 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 408 Exclusion of Strangers, q. 150 Financial Statement, m. 238, 278 Supply-Class II., 705 Vol. 119 :- Badger, Wilfred, m. 276 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, q. 152 Diack's Petition, m. 44 Egmont National Park Bill, 2R. 280 Factories Bill, m. 345; 3R. 370 Flynn, John, m. 278 Maori Lands Administration Bill, Com. 984 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 3R. 717 Patea Election, m. 393 Supply- Class II., 28 Class IV., 75, 82 Class VI., 245, 261, 262 Class XXVII., 869 (Public Works Fund) Supplementary Estimates - Class XVI., 1249 T. TAIAROA, Hon. H. K., Otago, Vol. 117 :- Taiaroa's, H. K., Petition, q. 71 Vol. 119 :- Lake Ellesmere, q. 235 Maori Antiquities Bill, 2R. 348 Maori Councils Bill, 2R. 836 Proclamation of Maori Districts in Middle Island, m. 1 Taumutu Native Commonage, q. 915 Whakapuaka Block, m. 873 TANNER, Mr. W. W., Avon, Vol. 116 :- Belfast Railway-station, q. 386 Counties Bill, Int. 13 ; m. 31 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 527 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 480 School-teachers' Classification, q. 598 Woodville County Bill, 2R. 467 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 254 
<page>1326</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1366</url>
Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 648 Completion of Valuation rolls, q. 95 Conciliation Boards, m. 358 Counties Bill, 2R. 187 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 608 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 49 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 257, 266 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 122 Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Women and Children, q. 486 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend. ment Bill, 3R. 33 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 75 Morning Sittings, m. 475 Supply- Class I., 577, 581 Class II., 685 Vol. 119 :- Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 3R. 659 Counties Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 581 Easton, Herbert E., Rep. Sel. Com. 889 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 356 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 570 Ocean Mail-services, m. 461 Old-age Pensions Bill, Cons. of Amend. 1162 Order of Business, Obs. 602 Public Works Bill, 2R. 1239 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering  Bill, Com. 1225, 1228 Supply- Class II., 23, 26, 1245 Class III., 63 Class IV., 89 Class VIII., 258, 261 Class VI., 1248 (Supplementary) Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1034 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, Int. 844 THOMPSON, Mr. R., Marsden, Vol. 116 :- Bush Settlers' Rents and Taxes, q. 32 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 472 District Courta Bill, 2R. 395, 477 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 320 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 352 Libel Law, q. 494, 495 Rebates to Crown Tenants, q. 188 Rodney Electorate, q. 382 Troopship " Tagus," Obs. 235 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 251 Vol. 117 :- Crown Tenants' Rebate, m. 82 Kerse, Charles, and Others, Rep. Sel. Com. 472 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 381 Old, John, Rep. Sel. Com. 503, 508 Vol. 117-continued. Public Health Bill, m. 374 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 278 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, 2R. 105 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege. m. 75 Financial Statement, m. 484 Morning Sittings, m. 475 Supply-Class I., 581 Vol. 119 :- Appropriation Bill, 2R. 1262 Commissioners of Education Reserves, q. 195 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2B. 299 Diack's Petition, Rep. Sel. Com. 41 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 356 Hikurangi Volunteer Corps, q. 193 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, 2R. 571 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, Rep. Sel. Com. 243 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 754 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 2R. 557; m. 962 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1241 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, 2R. 559; 3B. 719 Supply- Class IV., 75, 89 Class VI., 1248 (Supplementary) Class VII., 252 Class XI., 409 Class XII., 435 Class XIV., 420 Class XVI., 439 Class XXI., 861, 864 (Public Works Fund) Class XXVI., 868 Survey Department Nominal Roll, m. 887 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1216 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, m. 1035 THOMSON, Mr. J. W., Clutha, Vol. 116 :- Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 691 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 259 Vol. 117 :- Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 208 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 391 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, 2R. 436 Railway Traffic on Sundays, q. 304 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 330 Representation Bill, 2B. 111 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 359 Burns, The late Mr. A. J., m. 561 Financial Statement, m. 99 Mackenzie, The late Mr. M. J. S., m. 56 Morning Sittings, m. 478 
<page>1327</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1367</url>
Vol. 119 :- Balclutha-Owaka Railway, q. 160 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 300; 3R. 664 Factories Bill, 3R. 365 Holmes, Hon. M., Death of the, m. 45 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 957 Railways Authorisation Bill, 2R. 1166 State Coal-mines Bill, 3R. 910 Supply-Class VII., 251 TOMOANA, Hon. H., Hawke's Bay, Vol. 118 :- Napier Maori Club Reserve, q. 587 Waipawa Railway-siding, q. 642 Vol. 119 :- Maori Lands Administration Bill, Com. 1155 ; 3R. 1158 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1203 Whakapuaka Block, mn. 871, 874 TWOMEY, Hon. J. M., Canterbury, Vol. 116 :- Address in Reply, m. 29 Bible-reading in Schools, Obs. 551 Colonial Bank Liquidation, m. 582 Companies Bill, 2R. 372 Imperial Honours, m. 176 Inspection of Private Schools, m. 613 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 331 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 462 Vol. 117 :- Ashburton County Council Empowering Bill, 2R. 237 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 340; 3R. 363 ; m. 470 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 177 Referendum Bill, 2R. 1 Shops and Offices Bill, Com. 423, 531 Training-ships, m. 135 Vol. 118 :- Companies Bill, Com. 335, 459, 460 ; 3R. 500, 502 Kerr, Death of the Hon. J., m. 150 Shops and Offices Bill, 3R. 268 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 689 Von Blaramberg, H., m. 456 Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 884 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 67, 70 Factories Bill, Com. 1012 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, 3R. 1084 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, m. 713, 729, 834 ; 3R. 916, 942, 945 Labour Day, m. 235 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, 2R. 785 Local Bills, m. 881 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 3R. 1158 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2R. 879 Vol. 119-continued. Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 237, 241 Mortgages of Land Bill, Com. 180 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, Com. 273 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, Com. 96; 3R. 269, 270 Whakapuaka Block, m. 873 W. WALKER, Hon. L., Canterbury, Vol. 118 :- Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 590 WALKER, Hon. W. C., Canterbury (Minister of Education and Minister of Immigration), Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 503, 585 Address in Reply, m. 29 Appointment of New Commandant, Obs. 326 Assassination of King Humbert, m. 179 Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, 2R. 585 Chairman of Committees, m. 225, 227, 229 Checking Railway Luggage, q. 102; m. 108 Chinese Immigrants Bill, 2R. 493 Colonial Bank Liquidation, m. 580 Companies Bill, 2R. 366, 373 Cyanide Process Extension Bill, 2R. 492 Defence Department, m. 179 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 276 Goldfields and Mines Committee, m. 668 Gold-mining Industry, q. 665 Grand Hotel Fire, Auckland, q. 103 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, 2R. 179; 3R. 328, 366 Imperial Honoura, m. 177 Labour Bills Committee, m. 276 Law Amendment Bill, 2R. 583 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 328 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 671 Public Health Bill, 2R. 492 Private Schools, Inspection of, m. 614 Queen Victoria, Death of, m. 3, 179 Referendum Bill, 2R. 669 School Attendance Bill, 2R. 464 Shops and Offices Bill, 2R. 103 Standard Certificates, q. 327 Tobacco-smoking by Youths, q. 174 Training-ships, q. 577 Trawling, q. 365 Vaccination, q. 666 Victoria College Site, q. 577 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 459 463; m. 583 Vol. 117 :- Cemeteries Bill, m. 237 Cemetery Trustees Bill, m. 290 Disorder ir Committee, m. 592 Dowager Empress of Germany, Death of the, m. 281 Government Arch, q. 289 Government Insurance Office, q. 70 Health Officer, q. 174 Land for Settlements Act, m. 467, 500 \- 
<page>1328</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1368</url>
Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 79; m. 335, 341 ; 3R. 360, 362 ; m. 501 Lands and Survey Report, q. 290 Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 281 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 176 New Hebrides, q. 173 Referendum Bill, 2R. 139 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, m. 526 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 365, 433 ; Com. 531 Sire Horses Imported by Government, m. 492 State-school Children Drill Bill, 2R. 290 Statutes Revision Committee, m. 81 Taiaroa's, H. K., Petition, q. 71 Training-ship, m. 74, 136 Troopers, Returned, and Public Health, q. 592 Victoria College, q. 593 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, 3R. 501 Vol. 118 :- Cigarette-smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, 2R. 403 Companies Bill, mn. 332, 339 ; 3R. 502, 505 Education Boards Election Bill, 2R. 642 Exportation of Arms Bill, 2R. 661 Fraser, The late Colonel, m. 558 Friendly Societies, q. 641 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 2R. 591 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, m. 202 Imported Railway-carriages, q. 399 Kerr, Death of the Hon. J., m. 149 Law Amendment Bill, m. 596 Library Accommodation, m. 687 Mackenzie, The late Mr. M. J. S., m. 558 Mckinley, President: Attempted Assassina- tion, m. 399 Mckinley, President, Death of, m. 557 McKinley, President, Funeral of, m. 596 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 662 Napier Maori Club Reserve, q. 587 Promissory Oaths Bill, 2R. 663 Shops and Offices Bill, 3R. 258, 265 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, 2R. 690 Vaccination, m. 331 Von Blaramberg, H., m. 456 Waipawa Railway-siding, q. 612 Vol. 119 : - Adjournment, m. 1207 Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 884 Apology, Obs. 870 Appropriation Bill, 3R. 1206 Assembly Library, m. 308 Bonar, Death of the Hon. Mr., m. 1200 Cadet Corps of Collegiate and Secondary Schools, q. 871 Chairman of Committees, Election of, m. 66, 70 &c. Charitable Gifts Bill, 2R. 1, 3 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, 2R. 447 Companies Bill, m. 1200 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 2R. 1076 Cornwall Park Duties Exemption Bill, 2R. 447 Coupons in Tea, m. 93 Disorder in Committee, m. 443; Obs. 447 Duke and Duchess of York, Tour of the, m. 1016, 1173 Education Boards Election Bill, m. 647 Egmont National Park Bill, 2R. 579 Ellesmere, Lake, q. 235 Factories Bill, m. 1004, 1013 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2R. 648 Government Railways Department Classifica- tion Bill, 2R. 1082 Holmes, Death of the Hon. M., m. 39 Horses imported by New Zealand Govern- ment, m. 186 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 235 ; q. 308 ; m. 649, 741 : Com. 786; m. 833 ; 3R. 916, 937 Injured Members of Contingents, q. 1008 Inspection of Machinery Bill, 2R. 649 Inspection of Meat, q. 916 Land Transfer Assurance Fund, m. 94 Local Bills, m. 881 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 1075 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, 2R. 1204 Maori Antiquities Bill, 2R. 347, 350 Maori Councils Bill, 2R. 835 Maori Districts, Proclamation of, in Middle Island, m. 1 Maori Lands Administration Bill, 2R. 1152, 1156 ; 3R. 1158 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, 2B. 877 Military Pensions Bill, 2R. 1173 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, m. 266 Money-lenders Bill, 2R. 181, 240; m. 445 " Monowai," The Missing Steamer, q. 702 Mortgages of Land Bill, m. 180 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, 2R. 1202 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 1202 Old-age Pensions Bill, 2R. 836; 3R. 946; Com. 1004 Opium Prohibition Bill, 2R. 447 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 877 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1169 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 838 Public Trust Office Bill, 2R. 1172 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 270 Railway Dining-cars, q. 785 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, 2R. 1205 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 310 School Attendance Bill, Com. 145 ; m. 1169 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, m. 95; 38. 268 Sly-grog Selling, q. 701 Taumutu Native Commonage, q. 915 Templeton Domain Board Empowering Bill, 2R. 875 Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1201 Trustee Bill, 2R. 3 Victoria College, m. 1199 Victoria College Site Bill, 2R. 1204 Wesleyan Church Vesting Bill, 2R. SSO Whakapuaka Block, m. 872, 874 
<page>1329</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1369</url>
WARD, Sir J. G., Awarua (Minister for Rail- ways, Postmaster-General, Commissioner of Electric Telegraphs, Colonial Secretary, Minister of Industries and Commerce, and Minister of Public Health), Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 361, 363 Addington Railway-station, q. 591 Address in Reply, m. 129 Advertisements of Quack Medicines, q. 590 Annual Season Tickets, q. 592 Aparima Railway-bridge, q. 593 Appointments to Railway Service, q. 387 Auckland Railway-station, q. 387 Belfast Railway-station, q. 386 Bicycles, Carriage of, q. 595 Casual Railway-hands, q. 590, 591 Christchurch Railway-station, q. 595 Clifton Railway-platform, q. 590 Club Charters, q. 595 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 470 District Health Officers, q. 33 Dunedin-Mosgiel Duplicate Line, q. 191 Dunedin Post-office, q. 596 Dunedin Railway-station, q. 387 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 429 Employés in Railway Workshops, q. 591 Fairfax Stationmaster, q. 403 Fairlie Railway-platform, q. 246 Firewood, Railway Freights on, q. 407 Fuel for Locomotives, q. 594 Glenavy, Morven, Willowbridge, and Bor- tou's Railway-sheds, q. 385 Glenavy Station-yard, q. 591 Grain-sacks, Weight of, q. 593 Hanmer Springs, q. 32 Hokitika Harbour Bcard Loan, Q. 405 Home for Incurables, q. 594 Hundred Line Siding, q. 403 Importation of Big Game, q. 194 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 19 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 2R. 353, 358 Invercargill Railway Workshops, q. 403 Islington, Hornby, and Templet: n Railway Services, q. 592 Kaiapoi Railway-station, q. 386 Kaikoura Daily Mail service, q. 594 Kelvin Grove, Flag station at, q. 505 Kurow Public Buildings, q. 404 Milk-vans, q. 247 Morning Sittings, m. 249 Mount Cook Hermitage, q. 385 Mount Egmont Railway, q. 597 Nightcaps Stationmaster, q. 590 Oamaru-Kurow Railway, q. 215 Otautau Tele phonic Communication with Laker, Q. 402 Patterson's Creek Railway, q. 596 Payment of Railway Ballast-gangs, q. 406 Periodical Railway Returns, q. 591 Petone S:ation and Hutt Ruilway, q. 247 Plumping at Elections, q. 596 Post-and-Telegraph Office for Mornington, q. 245 Public Health Bill, 2R. 360; Com. 392 Public Health Regulations, q. 406 Railway-fares, q. 596 Ra Iway Officers' Classification, q. 386 WARD, Sir J. G .- continued. Vol. 116-continued. Railway Passengers, 190 Railway-rates in North and South Islands, q. 245 Railway Service Wages, q. 592, 593 Railway-sleepers, q. 198 Railway-siding between Ranfurly and Wed- derburn, q. 36 Railway Spark arrester, q. 246 Reduction of the Weight of Sacks, q. 35 Registration of Debentures, q. 386 Sanatoria for Consumptives, q. 197, 386 Sanatorium at Rotorua, q. 589 Sanatorium for Mount Egmont, q. 5 Sanatorium near Naseby, q. 36 Slaughtering Inspectors, q. 405 Springburn Branch Line, q. 190 St. Andrew's Telegraph-office, q. 245 Stock-loading Yards at Inglewood, q. 590 Stock-loading Yards at Otamita, q. 402 "Tagus," Troopship, Obs. 234 Through Rate for Grain, q. 189 Vaile's Railway Stage System, Obs. 374 Wagons for Nelson-Motupiko Railway, q. 590 Waimatuku Railway Wants, q. 384 Waipahi-Heriot Railway, Preferential Rail- way-rate on, q. 590 Wellington-Hutt Railway, q. 193 Wellington-New Plymouth Railway, q. 405 Willowbridge and Uxbridge Railway station, q. 404 Woodville County Bill, 2R. 468 Vol. 117 :- Accommodation for Passengers on Southern Trains, q. 511 Artificial Manures, Carriage of, q. 298 Breach of Privilege, m. 647, 657 Bull's Post office, q. 92 Cocoanut Oil-cake, Freight on, q. 510 Companies Bill. 2R. 416, 420 Concessions to Telegraph Linemen, q. 511 Consumptives, Sanatorium for, q. 306 Copyright Act, q. 298 Ellesmere Lake, q. 93 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, m. 582 Grey District Hospital and Charitable Aid Board, q. 306 Hastings Railway-station, q. 512 Hawke's Bay Health Officer, q. 301 Hillside Workshops, q. 511 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3), m. 596 Infant Mortality : Population, q 301 Inspection of Buildings, q. 304 Invercargill Railway -- tarion, q. 489 Kaikora North Railway-station, q. 512 Kerr, The late Hon. J., m. 637 Kimbell, Telephone at, q. 91 Lawrence Railway Offices, q. 305 Loan, 4-per-cent. Debenture, m. 638 Local Industries, Encouragement to, q. 298 Mail-delivery, q. 91 Makobine Viaduct, m. 350 Manure, Railway Freight on, q. 305 Maori Names of Railway statione, q. 513 McLean's Railway station, q. 90 
<page>1330</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1370</url>
WARD, Sir J. G .- continued. Vol. 117-continued. Mercer Railway- station, q. 513 Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 379, 386 Newspaper Postage, q. 92 Porter, Ralph, q. 489 Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, q. 299 Public Health Bill, m. 375 Railway Charges, q. 299 Railway-hands, Casual, q. 91 Railway-sleepers, q. 301 Railway Tickets, q. 92 Rangiora Railway station, q. 90 Southbridge Trains, q. 300 Telegraph Messengers, q. 513 Varnish Industry, q. 303 Waikato Line Rolling-stock, q. 512 Waimate Health Officer, q. 297 Winter Railway-excursion Fares, q. 510 Wool-market, q. 304 Vol. 118 :- Adjournment, m. 500 Athletics, Subsidies for Promotion of, q. 631 Auckland Varnish Company, q. 632 Breach of Privilege, m. 273, 348, 387, 423, 451 Carriage of Wool between Oxford and Christ- church, q. 624 Conciliation and Arbitration for Railway Employés, Obs. 1 Crown Grants in Deeds Registry Offices, q. 628 Departmental Returns, m. 204, 206 Departmental Statements in Hansard, m. 224 Devonport Post-office, q. 625 Ellerslie Railway-station, q. 623 Financial Statement, m. 148, 151 Fraser, Hector, q. 625 Hutt Railway-line, q. 626 Kaituna Postal Arrangements, q. 630 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 647 Mckinley, President : Attempted Assassina- tion, m. 464 Mail-trams : Onehunga and Auckland, q. 629 Morning Sittings, m. 477 Morven Trains and Mails, q. 623 Mussel Bay Railway-crossing, q. 624 Otago Central Railway : Railway.siding, q. 631 Privilege Tickets, q. 630 Public Health Inspectors, q. 629 Railway Classification, q. 623, 632 Railway Charges, Q. 628 Railway-crossings, q. 631 Railway Operatives' Plebiscite, q. 629 Railway Servants Superannuation and Classi- fication Acts, q. 626 Railway Superannuation Scheme, q. 632 Second-cla-s Railway-carriages, q. 627 Sulphuric Acid, Rate on, q. 632 Supply- Class I., 527, 541, 545 &c , 577, 582 &c. Class IL., 666 &c., 695 &c. m. 693 Tree-planting along Railway-lines, q. 632 Waitaki River Anglers, q. 623 Woodville Po-t-office, q. 624 Workers' Weekly Railway Tickets, q. 627 WARD, Sir J. G .- continued. Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 2R. 796 Appropriation Bill, 2R. 1256 ; 3R. 1269 Auckland-Waikato Railway, q. 906 Balclutha-Owaka Railway, q. 160 Ballast-train Hands, q. 161 Butter, Carriage of, q. 903 Christchurch-Lyttelton Railway Rates, q. 162 Companies Bill, 2R. 1179 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, m. 1176 Diack's Petition, m. 41 Government Railways Department Classifi- cation Bill, m. 907; 2R. 1024; Com. 1072; 3R. 1073 ; m. 1160 Factories Bill, 3R. 382 Halswell Post-office, q. 906 Imported Rolling-stock, q. 855 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, 3R. 171; m. 1054 Industrial Home, q. 163 Lambs destroyed by Seagulls, q. 906 Little River and Lincoln Railway, q. 163 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, 2R. 763 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, 2R. 1232 Mortgages of Land Bill, m. 331 Municipal Corporations Act, q. 162 Municipalisation of Public Services, q. 163 Nelson Harbour Board Bid, 2R. 1179; Com. 1220 New Zealand Railways, m. 1159 Ocean Mail services, m. 455, 545 ; Com. 548, &c. ; m. 555 Orari-Timaru Railway, q. 331 Palmerston North Post-office, q. 906 Patea Election, Obs. 392 Payment of Members Bill, 2R. 1127 Public Debt, m. 147 Public Health Bill, m. 1160, 1188: Com. 1190 Purhe-school Teachers' Salaries Biil, 38. 74 Railway Expenditure, q. 907 Railway Classification and Superannuation. 21. 57 Railway Rates, Otago Central, Q. 330 Railway Return, m. 1173 Railway Servants Superannuation Bill, q. 16: Railway Service Regulations, q. 161 Railways Authorisation Bill, 28. 1168 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, m. 947 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 7 : 28. 126 San Francisco Mail-service, q. 161 South Africa, Trade with, q. 329 Southbrook Goods-sbed, q. 161 St. Leonard's, Post-office for, q. 903 Supply- Class II., 18, et seq. Class V., 91 et seq., 1247 Class VI., 255, 1248 Class XI., 406 Class XIV., 428 Class XII., 434, et seq. Class XXI., 865, 1250 (Public Works Func! Class XXII., 866 Class I., 1244, et seq. 
<page>1331</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1371</url>
WARD, Sir J. G .- continued. Vol. 119-continued. Timber Export Bill, Com. 1198; 2R. 1210 Time-table, Government Railway, q. 906 Totalisator Betting by Telegraph, q. 904 Vaile Stage Railway System, m. 788 Whangarei-Kawakawa Railway, q. 161 WILFORD, Mr. T. M., Suburbs of Wellington, Vol. 116 :- Accidents Compensation Bill, 2R. 362 Address in Reply, m. 41 Customs Duties, q. 242 Cycle Boards Bill, 2R. 473 Distriot Courts Bill, 2R. 394 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 309 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), m. 680 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 616, 620; 3R. 634, 637 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 481 Petone Station and Hutt Railway, q. 246 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 268, 275 Referendum Bill, 2R. 224 Seatoun, Lower Road to, q. 240 States-chool Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 291 Wages of Casual Railway-hands, q. 590 Wellington Harbour Board Bill, 2R. 466 Wellington-Hutt Railway, q. 193 Workmen's Homes at Khandallah or Crofton, q. 248 Vol. 117 :- Divorce Bill, 2R. 112, 119  Mortgages of Land Bill, 2R. 383 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), 2R. 120 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, 2R. 148, 162 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend ment Bill, 3R. 40 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 399 Vol. 118 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 74. 367 Financial Statement, m. 45. 177 Promissory Oaths Bill, 3R. 638 Storage Accommodation for Magazine Rifles and Carbines, q. 610 Supply- Class I., 582, 585 Class II., 703 Vol. 119 :- Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, 2R. 281 Elliotte, R. H., q. 902 Factories Bill, m. 331 ; Com. 345 Government Railways Department Classifica- tion Bill, q. 907; 2R. 1030 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 48 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 224 McDonald, Mrs. E. H., q. 902 Ocean Mail services, m. 514 ; Com. 550 Petone Property, Road to, q. 328 Railway Classification and Superannuation, m. 55, 59 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, m. 13 Supply- Class II., 30, 32 Class III., 65 WILFORD, Mr. T. M .- continued. Vol. 119-continued. Supply-continued. Class IV., 76, 82, 85 Class VI., 252 Class VIII., 261 Class XXI., 864 (Public Works Fund) Wellington Abattoirs, q. 105 WILLIAMS, Hon. H., Auckland, Vol. 119 :- Maori Lands Administration Bill, 2R. 1153 WILLIS, Mr. A. D., Wanganui, Vol. 116 :- Cadets at Christchurch, Treatment of, q. 196 Close Settlement in Wanganui District, q. 238 District Courts Bill, 2R. 395 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 314 Referendum Bill, 2R. 225 State Fire Insurance, Obs. 197 "Tagus," Troopship, Obs. 234 Totalisator Abolition Bill, 2R. 708 Vol. 117 :- Breach of Privilege, m. 651 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 48 Public Health Bill, m. 378 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 279 Vol. 118 :- Coroners' Inquests, q. 658 Financial Statement, mn. 115 Morning Sittings, m. 472 Supply-Class II., 670, 678, 681 Vol. 119 :- Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), 3R. 51 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, q. 593 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 169; m. 1040 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 985 Pariro& Native Reserve Bill, 3R. 720 State Coa !- mines Bill, 2R. 685 Supply- Class II., 28 Ciass IV., 79 Class V., 93 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, m. 848 WITHEFORD, Mr. J. H., City of Auckland, Vol. 116 :-- Address in Reply, m. 165 Bills for Public Libraries, q. 603 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 307 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 427, 434 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2). m. 681 Land for Settlements Bill, 2R. 519 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, 2R. 201 Sanatorium at Rotorua, q. 589 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2B. 299 Vol. 117 :- Cattle-landing in Auckland Harbour, q. 314 Contingents, Members of Returned, q. 89 
<page>1332</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1372</url>
WITHEFORD, Mr. J. H .- continued. Vol. 117-continued. Cycle Boards Bill, Com. 173 Duty on Glass-making Machinery, q. 94 Financial Statement, m. 665 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, 2R. 212, 216 Local Industries, Encouragement to, q. 289 Mckenzie, Death of Sir John, m. 289 Patea Harbour Bill, 2R. 59 Public Health Bill, m. 376 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 321 Survey of Crown Lands, m. 82 Varnish Industry, q. 303 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 408 Vol. 118 :- Auckland Varnish Company, q. 632 Breach of Privilege, m. 359, 429, 446, 449 Library Accommodation, Rep. Sel. Com. 648 Supply- Class I., 548 Class TI., 670, 684 &c., 700, 706 ## INDEX TO SUBJECTS.  A. Vol. 116. Absolute Majority Bill, h., 1R. 30 Accident Insurance Rates, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 187 Accidents Compensation Bill, I.c., 1R. 459; 2R. 583 ; 3R. 611 : h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 861 ; Com. 392; 3R. 373 Accommodation at Christchurch Railway-sta- tion, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 595 Acquisition of Estates in Hawke's Bay, h., q. (Mr. Hall), 401 Addington Railway-atation, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 591 Address in Reply, l.c , m. (Hon. Mr. Korr), 25; Obs. (Hon. the Speaker). 62 : h., m. (Mr. Col- lins), 37, 63, 109 ; Obs. (Mr. Speaker), 183 Address to the King, I.c., Obs. (Hon. the Speaker), 25 Adjournment, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 419 Advertisements of Quack Medicines, &c., h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 590 Alleged Misconduct of Volunteers, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 243 ; q. (Mr. Symes), 378 Ammunition License fees, h., q. (Mr. Hall), 606 Annett, Miss, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 247 Annexation of Fiji, h., q. (Captain Russell). 242 Annual Season Tickets, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 592 Aparima Railway-bridge, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 593 WITHEFORD, Mr. J. H .- continued. Vol. 119 :- Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, 20. 810 Auckland Crown Lands, q. 327 Auckland Drill-shed, q. 193 Auckland Rifle Range, q. 193 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 3R. 659 Customs Department Superannuation, q. 329 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, 2B. 354 Industrial Home, q. 163 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 958, 996 Maori Relics Bill, 2R. 222 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1240 Ocean Mail-services, m. 476, 554 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, 2R. 623 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 122 San Francisco Mail-service, q. 161 Supply- Class X., 399 Class XI., 408 Claes XVI., 440 Workmen's Homes, Land for, q. 109 Vol. 116-continued. Apiti and Norsewood Road, h., q. (Mr. Leth- bridge), 415 Appeal from Land and Income Assessment, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 381 Appointment of Boiler Inspectors, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 185 Appointment of the New Commandant, I.c., Obs. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 326 Appointments to Public Departments, h., m. (Mr. Arnold), 30 Appointments to Railway Service, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 386 Arbor Day, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jennings), 373 Ashburton County Council Empowering Bill. h., 1R. 30, 182 ; 2R. 374 Assassination of King Humbert, I.c., Message 179; h., Message 183 Auckland Railway-station, h., q. (Mr. Withe- ford), 387 Vol. 117. Accommodation for Passengers on Southern Trains, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 510 Adjournment. I.c., m. 532 Advances to Settlers Office, h., q. (Mr. Napier). 94, 348 Alexandra, Railway to, h., q. (Mr. Bennet). 97 Ammunition for .303 Rifles, h., q. (Mr. Col.ine), 477 Ammunition for Volunteers, h., Q. (Mr. Arno.d), 479 
<page>1333</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1373</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Answers to Questions, h., q. (Mr. Palmer), 25 Arbitration Court, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 88 Ashburton County Council Empowering Bill, l.c., 1R. 70 ; 2R. 237 : h., 3R. 82 Ashburton Drill-shed, h., q. (Mr. McLachlan), 21 Asiatic Restriction, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 248 Auckland Drill-shed, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 478 Auckland Government Arch, h., q. (Mr. Palmer), 343 Auckland Public Offices, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 517 Australasian Squadron, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 481 Awamoko Stream, h., q. (Major Steward), 93 ## Vol. 118. Adjournment, h., m. (Mr. Heke), 500; m. (Mr. Seddon), 621 Alcoholic Liquor Sale, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 621 Arbitration Court President Validation Bill, I.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 587 : h., 1R., 2R. 597; 3R. 606 Ashburton County Council Empowering Bill, l.c., 3R. 330 Auckland-Manukau Canal, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 612 Auckland Varnish Company, h., q. (Mr. Withe- ford), 632 Australasian Chamber of Commerce, h., q. (Mr. Field), 619 Vol. 119. Absolute Majority Vote Bill, h., Dis. 389 Accommodation for Select Committees, &c., h., Rep. Sel. Com. 311 Accommodation for War-ships at Port Chal- mers, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Alien), 895 Adjournment, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 4, 651, 1207 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 179; m. (Mr. Millar), 203; m. (Mr. Seddon), 1198, 1274 Advances to Settlers Act, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 157 ; m. (Mr. J. Allen), 887 Advances to Settlers Valuation Fees h., q. (Major Steward), 157 Aid to Public Works and Land Settlement Bill, l.c., 1R. 832 ; 2R. 884 ; 3R. 886 : h., 1R. 714; Message 789; 2R. 792; Com. 831; 3R. 832 Alleged Excessive Drinking of Taranaki Maoris, h., q. (Mr. Kaihau), 597 Allendale and Kaitargata Coal mines, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 145 ; m. (Mr. J. Allen), 145 Allendale Coal-mine, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 146 Ammunition for Volunteers and Rifle Clubs, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 312 Apology, l.c., Obs. (Hon. Mr. Pinkerton), 870 Appointments as Stipendiary Magistrates, h., q. (Mr. Morrison), 101 Appointments to Legislative Council, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 188; q. (Mr. Lang), 190; q. (Mr. Heke), 191 ; q. (Mr. Herries), 191 ; q. (Mr. G. J. Smith). 192 ; q. (Mr. McNab), 192; q. (Mr. Colvin), 317 ; q. (Mr. Monk), 595; q. (Mr. Bollard), 596 Appropriation Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1206: h., 1R., 2R. 1251 ; Com., 3R. 1268 Vol. 119-continued. Assembly Library, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Rigg), 308 Aubrey's Case, h., q. (Mr. Palmer), 200 Auckland Crown Lands, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 327 Auckland Drill-shed, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 193 Auckland Oyster-fisheries, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 321 Auckland Rifle-range, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 193 Auckland-Waikato Railway, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 905 Australian Lottery Advertisements, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 102 B. Vol. 116. Bank of New Zealand, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 231 Belfast, Railway-station at, h., q. (Mr. Tan- ner), 386 Berry, Rev. Joseph, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 401 Bible-reading in Schools, l.c., Petition (Hon. Mr. Twomey), 551 ; h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 237 Bicycle Dealers Registration Bill, h., 1R. 30 Bluecliffs Estate, h., q. (Major Steward), 380 Boatman's Coal-mine Fire, h., q. (Mr. Colvin), 408 Book.keeping of Public Bodies, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 400 Borough of Mornington Tramways Bill, h., 1R. 182 Bush Settlers' Rents and Taxes, h., q. (Mr. R. Thompson), 32 Business, Order of, l., Obs. (Mr. Speaker), 374 Vol. 117. Bicycles for Civil Service, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 15 Bicyclists in Parliament Grounds, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Ormond), 463 Birth Registrations, h., m. (Mr. Guinness), 343 Bishop's Reserve and other Native Lands, Masterton, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 345 Bonus for Preserved Milk, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), . 28 Breach of Privilege, h., Obs. (Mr. Palmer), 642 Bull's Post. office, h., q. (Mr. Stevens), 91 Business, Order of, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 373 Vol. 118. Blaramberg, H. von, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jen- nings), 454 Borough of Mataura Loan Validation Bill, h., 1R 506 Breach of Privilege, h., Obs. (Mr. Herries), 66 ; Rep. Sel. Com. (Major Steward), 271 ; Obs. (Mr. Deputy-Speaker), 339, 407 Burns, The late Mr. M. J. S. Mackenzie and the late Mr. A. J., h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 560 Vol. 119. Badger, Wilfred, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 276 Balclutha-Owaka Railway, h., q. (Mr. J. W. Thomson), 160 Ballast-train Hands, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 161 Bank-note Stamp Duty, h., m. (Mr. Eil), 146 
<page>1334</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1374</url>
Beattie, James, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 1085 Bicycle-dealers Registration Bill, h., Dis. 389 Bills discharged, l.c., 1169; h., 187, 389, 714, 887, 1085 Blackwater River Gold-dredging Company, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 180 Boilermakers at Addington Workshops, h., q. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 202 Bonar, Death of the Hor. Mr., l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1200; h., m. (Mr. Sed- don), 1220 Bonus for Shale-oil, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 897 Bonus on Kerosene and Paraffine-wax, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 896 Borough Council Officers' Retiring-allowances, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 189 Borough of Mataura Loan Validation Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 875 : h., 2R., 3R. 745 Borough of Mornington Tramways Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 874 : h., 2R., 3R. 745 Breach of Privilege, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 896 Brown, G., h., Rep. Sel. Com. 887 Bullion, &c., in Banks, h., m. (Mr. Ell), 147 Burgess Rolls h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 146 Burning Fallen Bush, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 152 Business of the Session, h., Obs. (Mr. Deputy- Speaker), 1274 Business. Order of, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 595 ; Obs. (Mr. Deputy-Speaker), 602; Obs. (Mr. · Seddon), 714  C. Vol. 116. Carriage of Bicycles, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 595 Casual Railway-hands, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Rus- sell), 591 Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, l.c., 1R. 364 ; 2R. 585; 3R. 665 : h., 1R. 182; 2R. 266 Chairman of Committees, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 225 Charitable Gifts Bill, h., 1R. 616 Charles Lillywhite, h., q. (Mr. Hutcheson), 191 Checking Railway Luggage, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Feldwick), 102, 103 Chinese Immigrants Bill, I.c., 1R. 276, 459 ; 2R. 493 ; BR. 551 : h., IR. 30 ; 2R. 361; Com. 392; 3R. 393 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, h., 1R. 673 City of Christchurch, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 30 City of Christchurch Electric Power and Loan Empowering Bill, h., 1R. 673 Classification of Inmates of Lunatic Asylums, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 198, 388 Clifton Railway-platform, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 590 Close Settlement in Wanganui District, h., q. (Mr. Willis), 238 Club Charters, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 595 Coal for Government Railways, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 230 Colonial Bank Liquidation, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. A. Lee Smith), 577 Commandant, Appointment of the New, l.c., Obs. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 326 Commandant of the Forces, New, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 279 ; q. (Captain Russell), 383 Committees, Sessional, l.c., 25, 174, 326 ; h. 30, 230 Commonwealth Celebrations, h., m. (Mr. McGuire), 230 Companies Bill, I.c., 1R. 326 ; 2R. 366 : h., 1R. 30 Conduct of Inquests, h., q. (Mr. Field), 593 Consumption of Fuel by Locomotives, h., q. (Mr. A. L. D. Fraser), 594 Contagious Diseases Repeal Bill, h., 1R. 586 Contingents on the Steamer "Tagus," h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 363 Cook County Vehicle Licensing Bill, h., 1R. 616 Cook Strait Ferry Service, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 601 Copies of Bills for Public Libraries, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 603 Coroners' Inquests, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Shrimski), 459 Cost of Imperial Visits, h., m. (Mr. Barclay), 63 ; m. (Mr. Monk), 230 Counties Bill, h., m. 12 ; m. (Hon. Mr. Sed- don), 31, 586 Counties Bill (No. 1), (Mr. Buddo), h., 1R. 30; 2R. 255 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, h., m. (Mr. Symes), 30 Customs Duties, h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 242 Cyanide Process Extension Bill, l.c., 1R. 450 ; 2R. 492 : h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 359; 3R. 373 Cycle Boards Bill, h., 1R. 30; 2R. 469 Vol. 117. Cable Messages re Frozen Meat, h., q. (Mr. Hornsby), 522 Cambridge Domain, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 252 Carriage of Artificial Manures, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 298 Casual Railway-hands, h., q. (Mr. Colvin). 91 Cattle-landing in Auckland Harbour, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 314 Cemeteries Bill, l.c., Message 238 Cemetery Trustees Validation Bill, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 290: h., m. (Mr. Duncan), 178; Message 240 Chapman, Mr. A. H., h., q. (Major Steward). 102 Charitable Gifts Bill, h., 1R. 373 ; 2R. 437 Civil Service Examinations, h., m. (Mr. Guir- ness), 296 Close Settlement in Tuapeka District, it., g. (Mr. Bennet), 25 Coal Commission, h., q. (Mr. R. Mckenzie), 93 Coal-mines Bill, h., 1R. 532 Coal-mines : Report of Royal Commission, h., m. (Mr. McGowan), 240 Cocoanut Oil-cake, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 296 Collingwood - Ferntown Bridge, h., q. (Mr. R. Mckenzie), 96 Colonial - made Saddlery for New Zealand Troops, h., q. (Mr. Field, for Mr. Witheford) 488 Colonial Scale of Staffs and Salaries for Public school Teachers, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 144 Companies Bill, h. 2R. 416 
<page>1335</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1375</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Compensation to Troopers for Loss of Horses, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 20 Completion of Valuation - rolls, h., Q. (Mr. Pirani), 95 Conciliation and Arbitration Cases, h., m. (Mr. Monk), 83 Conciliation Boards, h., m. (Mr. Graham), 353 ; q. (Mr. Millar), 480; q. (Mr. Collins), 510 Cook Group and other Islands Extension Bill, h., 1R. 82 Cook Islands Auxiliary Steamer, h., q. (Mr. Hutcheson), 306 Cook Islands Laws, h., m. (Mr. Herries), 296 Cook Islands Native Land Court, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 253 Co-operative Workers, h., q. (Mr. Lethbridge), 100 Copyright Act, h., q. (Major Steward), 298 Coronation of His Majesty, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 25 Counties Bill, h., 2R. 178 Criminal Assaults on Women and Children, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 488 Criminal Code Bill, h., 1R. 12 Cross's Property, Mr., h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 478 Crown Lands for Settlement, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 522 Crown Tenants' Rebate, h., m. (Mr. R. Thomp- son), 82 ; q. (Mr. Symes), 253 Cyanide Process Extension Bill, l.c., 3R. 70 Cycle Boards Bill, h., Com. 173  Vol. 118. Cape Brett Lighthouse, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 650 Carbines for Cadet Corps, h., q. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 620 Carriage of Wool between Oxford and Christ- church, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 624 Charitable Gifts Bill, l.c., 1R. 661 : h., Com. 634; 3R. 644 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, h., 1R. 204 Chatnam Islands Local Government, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 620 Christchurch-Lyttelton Railway, h., m. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 597 Cigarette-smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, l.c., 2R. 400, 588; m. 691 ; Com. 692 Commandant of the Forces, h., q. (Captain Russell), 151 ; q. (Mr. Pirani), 612 Companies Bill, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 332 ; Com.|459; 3R. 500 : h., 1R. 506 Conciliation and Arbitration for Railway Em- ployés, h., Obs. (S.r J. G. Ward), 1 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, h., 1R. 643 Cook Islands, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 644 Co-operative Workmen, h., q. (Mr. R. McKen- zie), 614 Cornwall Park Duties Exemption Bill, h., 1R. 693 Coroners' Inquests, h., q. (Mr. Willis), 658 Cost of Visit of Imperial and Indian Troops and Royal Visit, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 619 Counties Bill, I.c., 1R. 640 ; 2R. 688 : h., 3R. 597 Crown Grants in Deeds Registry Offices, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 627 Vol. 119. Cadet Corps of Collegiate and Secondary Schools, l.c., q. (Hon. Colonel Pitt), 871 Calliope Dock, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 895 Canterbury College and Canterbury Agricul- tural College Act Regulations, h , q. (Mr. Ell), 165 Canterbury College Empowering Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 876 : h., 1R. 4 ; 2R., 3R. 745 Captain Jackson Barry's Book, h., q. (Mr. Hornsby), 163 Captured Guns, h., m. (Mr. Houston), 146 Carriage of Butter, h , q. (Mr. Napier), 903 Cash Land-values in Waimate and Hawera, h., m. (Mr. McGuire), 147 Central Otago Railways, h., m. (Mr. Bennet), 311 Charges of Drunkenness, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 102 Charitable Gifts Bill, l.c., 2R. 1; 3R. 307 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, l.c., 1R. 389 ; 2R. 447; 3R. 509: h., 2R. 281; Com., 3R. 359 Chatham Islands, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 596 Chatham Islands County Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1199 : h., 1R. 389 ; 2R. 575, 1173 ; 3R. 1173 Chemists' Rota of Attendance Bill, l.c., 1R. 509 ; 2R. 647, 874 Christchurch Drill-hall, h., q. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 193 Christchurch-Lyttelton Railway Rates, h., q. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 161 City of Auckland Loans Consolidation and Auckland City Borrowing Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R. 874 ; m. 1084 ; 3R. 1085 : h., 2R., 3R. 745; m. (Mr. Fowlds), 1161 City of Christchurch Electric Power and Loan Empowering Bill, h., m. 751 Claxton, William, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 99 Clive Rifle Volunteers, h., q. (Captain Russell), 591 Close Settlement at Johnsonville, h., q. (Mr. Field), 897 Coal-mines Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R. 832; Com. 1151; 3R. 1152 : h., 2R. 276, 721; Com. 722; 3R. 723; Message 1161 Commissioners of Education Reserves, h., q. (Mr. R. Thompson), 195 Committees, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 1003 Commonwealth Tariff. l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. T. Kelly), 276 : h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 586 ; q. (Mr. Lang), 588; q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 594. Companies Bill (No. 2), l.c., Message 1200 ; h., 2R., 3R. 1179 Contagious Diseases Bill, h., Dis. 389 Cook and other Islands Government Bill (No. 2), l.c., 1R. 701; 2R. 1076; 3R. 1051; Message 1173: h., 1R. 187; 2R. 283 ; Com. 359; 38. 652; Message 1161, 1176 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, h., Dis. 187 Cook Group and other Islands Laws Extension Bill, h., Dis. 187 Coolie Labour at Colonial Sugar Company's Fiji Mills, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 188 Co-operative Labourers in Patea Electorate, \- h., m. (Mr. Massey), 887 
<page>1336</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1376</url>
Cornwall Park Duties Exemption Bill, I.c., 1R. 389; 2R. 447 ; 3R. 509 : h., 1R. 276; 2R. 311 ; 3R. 351 Correction, A, h., Obs. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 1208 Counties Act Amendment Bill, I.c., 3R. 93 Counties Bill, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 580 Coupons in Tea, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jenkinson), 93 Criminal Code Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1169 : h., 2R. 769; Com., 3R. 1164 Criminal Statistics for Licensing Districts, h., m. (Mr. Ell), 887 Crown Grants Bill, h., 1R. 96; Dis. 389 Crown Lease Surrenders, h., m. (Mr. O'Meara), 887 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Act, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 107; q. (Mr. Symes), 152; q. (Mr. Fisher), 325 Crown Tenants' Rent Rebate Bill, h., 1R. 389 Customs Department Superannuation, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 329 Customs Returns, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 73 Cyole Boards Bill, h., Dis. 389 ## D. Vol. 116. Dangerous Roads, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 414 Death of Queen Victoria, l.c., Obs. (Hon. the Speaker), 2; Message 179: h., Obs. (Mr. Speaker), 5; Message 183  Deceased Husband's Brother Marriage Bill, h., Obs. (Mr. Speaker), 13 Defence Department, l.c., m. (Hon. Colonel Pitt), 178 #cc-zero Dental Inspection of School children, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 388 Dentists as Jurymen, h., q. (Mr. Palmer), 194 Disqualification Act, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 241 District Court for Auckland, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 603 District Courts Bill (No. 1), h., 1R. 30; Dis. 466 District Courts Bill (No. 2), h., 1R. 30; 2R. 393 District Health Officers, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 32 Divisions, Legislative Council,- Chairman of C. mmittees, m. 228 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 278 Hospital Nurses R: gistration Bill, Com. 278 Vaccination, m. 668 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 464; Com. 491, 492, 552; 3R. 616 Divisions, House of Representatives,- Address in Reply, m. 173 Eight Hours Bill, 2R. 491 Elective Executive Bill, m. 459 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), m. 22 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 495; Com. 574, 575, 576, 609, 610, 611 ; m. 620; 3R. 665 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, 2R. 485 Police Offences Bill, 2R. 276 ; Com. 392 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, 2R. 265 Referendum Bill, Com. 363, 364 ; m. 507 Divisions, House of Representatives-conta. State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, 2R. 303 ; Com. 486 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, 2R. 255 Divorce Bill, h., 1R. 182 Drummond's Ferry, Papatotara Road, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 411 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramway Bill, h., 1R. 230 Dunedin Post-office, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 596 Dunedin-Mosgiel Duplicate Line, h., q. (Mr. Carncross), 191 Dunedin Railway-station, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 387 Dunedin Waterworks Extension Bill, h., 1R. 230 Vol. 117. Death of Sir John Mckenzie, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 281 : h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 280 ; m. (Mr. Seddon), 285 Death of the Dowager Empress of Germany, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 281; Obs. (Hon. the Speaker), 289 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 283 ; Obs. (Mr. Speaker), 296 Dairy School at Levin, h., q. (Mr. Field), 310 Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., h., Obs. (Mr. Deputy-Speaker), 638 Defence, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 483 Dehorning of Cattle, h., q. (Mr. Hornsby), 104 Delayed Questions, h., Obs. (Mr. J. Allen), 216 Dineon, M. D., h., q. (Mr. Lang), 474 Disorder in Committce, l.c., Obs. (Hon. Colonel Baillie), 592 Distress for Rent Bill, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 28 Divisions, Legislative Council,- Election of Chairman of Committees. m. 205 Land for Settlements Bill, m. 364, 503 Police Offences Bill, Com. 176 Referendum Bill, m. 143 ; 2R. 175 Shops and Offices Bill, Com. 472, 531, 593. 594, 595 Divisions, House of Representatives .- Debenture Loan, 4-per-cent., m. 642 Divorce Bill, 2R. 121 Eight Hours Bill, m. 173, 524 Elective Executive Bill. 2R. 162 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, Com. 491 ; 3R. 591 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, Com. 442 Libel Bill (No. 1), 2R. 172 Police Offences Bill, m. 255 Public Accounts Committee, m. 550, 569 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, Com. 522, 523 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill, 2R. 334 Representation Bill, 2R. 112 Shops and Shop assistants Bill, Com. 360 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bul, m. 154 ; 2R. 162 Wellington Harbour Beard Act 1879 Amend. ment Bill, m. 46 Young Persons Protection Bill, 2R. 412 Divorce Bill, h., 2R. 112 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bull. h., 2R. 60, 145 Dunedin Public Art Gallery, h., q. (Mr. Millar). 481 
<page>1337</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1377</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Duty on Glass-making Machinery, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 94 Duty on Gold-saving Fabrics, h., q. (Mr. Guin- ness), 348 Vol. 118. Death of President Mckinley, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 557 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 559 Death of Sir John Mckenzie, l.c., Obs. (Hon. the Speaker), 149 Death of the Hon. J. Kerr, l.c., Obs. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 149 Defence Report, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 461 Departmental Returns, h., m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 204 Departmental Statements in Hansard, h., Obs. (Mr. Deputy-Speaker), 224 Devonport, Post-office at, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 625 Divisions, Legislative Council,- Blaramberg, H. von, m. 459 Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, Com. 692, 693 Companies Bill, m. 459, 460 Gaming and Lotteries Bill, 2R. 594 Informal Petitions, m. 202 Law Amendment Bill, Com. 688 Shops and Offices Bill, m. 203, 204 Divisions, House of Representatives,- Breach of Privilege, m. 375, 447, 453, 454 Cycle Boards Bill, Com. 618 1 Eight Hours Bill, Com. 618 Financial Statement, m. 20, 46  Hansard, m. 634 Library Accommodation, m. 649 Money-lenders Bill, Com. 659, 660 Morning Sittings, m. 484 Postponement of Questions, m. 470 Promissory Oaths Bill, Com. 635 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), Com. 616, 617 Supply, m. 553, 555, 556, 577, 580, 584, 586, 695, 715, 716 Trustee Bill, Com. 661 Wednesday Sittings, m. 666 Dunedin Evening Star, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 609 Dunedin Hospital Trustees, h., q. (Mr. T. Mac. kenzie), 652 Vol. 119. Dairy Stud Stock, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 112 Deaf - and - dumb Institution, Sumner, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 163 Death of the Dowager Empress of Germany, l.c., Message 1015; h., Message 1056 Death of the Hon. M. Holmes, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 39 ; h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 45 Death of the Hon. Mr. Bonar, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1200; h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 1220 Debentures under Land for Settlements Con- solidation Act, h., Obs. (Mr. Deputy-Speaker), 947 Defence Department, l.c., q. (Hon. Colonel Pitt), 1 Vol. 119-continued. Delaney, Walter, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 315 Departmental Land aud Buildings, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 317 Department of Agriculture, Reports of, h., q. (Mr. Stevens), 156 Despatches between Governor and Home Authorities, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 587 Diack's, Mr., Petition, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 40 Discount Stamps Bill, h., Dis. 399 Disfranchisement of Wellington, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 315 Disorder in Committee, l.c., Obs. (Hon. Captain Bailiie), 442; Obs. (Hon. Mr. Shrimski), 446 District Court, Dannevirke, h., q. (Mr. Hall), 324 District Courts, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 198 District Courts Bill, h., Dis. 389 Divisions, Legislative Council,- Assembly Library, m. 310 Coal-mines Bill, Com. 1152 Election of Chairman of Committees, m. 68, 70, 71 Factories Bill, m. 1171 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 745, 786, 787, 788; m. 833, 835, 945, 946; 3R. 946 Labour Day, m. 235 Money-lenders B:Il, Com. 310, 351 Mortgages of Land Bill, Com. 181 Old-age Pensions Bill, Com. 886; m. 946, 1004 Public Trust Office Bill, Com. 1173 Public Works Bill, Com. 1204 Rabbit Nuisance Bill, m. 276 School Attendance Bill, Com. 145 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, m. 96, 270 Statutes Compilation Bill, Com. 96 Divisions, House of Representatives,- Adjournment, m. 1198, 1274 Charitable Institutions Rating Bill, Com. 359 Coal-mines Bill, Com. 722, 723 Committees, m. 1003 Cook and other Islands Government Bill, 3R. 673 ; m., Com. 1178 Criminal Code Bill, 2R. 780 ; Com. 1164 Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, Tour of the, m. 1035 Factories Bill, Com. 339, 341 &c., 1074, 1075 Food Trusts Bill, m. 842 Government Railways Department Classifica- tion Bill, Com. 1033, 1072 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, Com. 169 Levels and Waimate Counties Boundaries Alteration Bill, m. 753 Local Bills, m. 855 Local Bodies' Loans B.Il, Com. 768, 769 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, 2R. 1238 Maori Lands Administration Bill, m. 996, 1003 ; Com. 1003, 1057, 1058, 1059 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, Com. 1224 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, Com. 1182; m. 1195; 2R. 1196 North of Auckland Railway, m. 1243 Ocean Mail-services, Com. 548, 549, &c. 
<page>1338</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1378</url>
Divisions, House of Representatives-contd. Old-age Pensions Bill, m. 1168 Payment of Members Bill, m. 448, 1142, 1145 ; Com. 1145, &c. Public Health Bill (No. 3), Com. 1197 Public-school Teachers' Salaries Bill, Com. 781 ; m. 783 Public Works Bill, m , Com. 1239 ; 3R. 1240 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empower- ing Bill, Com. 1224, 1226, 1227 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, 2R. 144 ; 3R. 216 State Coal-mines Bill, Com. 908. 909 Supply, m. 25, 30, 35, 37, 38, 62, 65, 78, 250, 260, 263, 265, 408, 413, 416, 417, 418, 419, 432, 437, 440, 441 ; Public Works, 861, 867, 870, 1245 &c. Timber Export Bill, 2R. 1218; Com. 1218, 1219 Victoria College Site Bill, Com. 1187 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, m. 753 Donnelly, M. A., h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 101 Drill-shed at Fairlie for Mackenzie Mounted Rifles, h., q. (Major Steward), 594 Drunkenness at Poolburn, h., q. (Mr. T. Mac- kenzie), 600 Drunkenness at Taihape, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 599 Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, Tour of the, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1016 ; Obs. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1173 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 1034; Message 1188 Dunedin City and Suburban Tramways Bill, l.c., 1R. 1199 ; 2R., 3R. 1205 : h., Com. 714,  1240 ; 3R. 1240 Dunedin Waterworks Extension Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 877 : h., 2R., 3R. 751 Duties in Cook Islands, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 156 Duty on Agricultural Implements, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 187 E. Vol. 116. Eight Hours Bill, h., 1R. 30; 2R. 303; q. (Mr. Flatman), 384 ; 2R. 486 Eketahuna-Shannon Road, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 413 Elective Executive Bill, h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 420 Election of Chairman of Committees, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 276 Employés in Railway Workshope, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 591 Expiring Laws Continuance Bill, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 13 Exportation of Arms Bill, h., 1R. 30; 2R. 393 Vol. 117. East Coast Land Settlements Estates, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 24 Education Boards Elections, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 344 Education Reserves, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. T. Kelly), 334 Egmont County Bill, h., 1R. 295 Eight Hours Bill, h., Com. 172 Election of Chairman of Committees, l.c., m. 294 | Fair Rent Bill, h., 1R. 30, 63; q. (Mr. Ell), 192 Elective Executive Bill, 2R. 162 Ellesmere, Lake, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 93 Encouragement to Local Industries, h., q. (Mr. \- Witheford), 298 1 Encouraging Population, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 476 Evidence Bill, h., 1R. 595 Vol. 118. Early Records of the Colony, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 620 Earnscleugh Run, h., m. (Mr. W. Fraser), 507 Education Boards Election Bill, l.c., 1B. 587; 2R. 642 ; 3R. 661 : h., 1R. 693 Egmont County Bill, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 462 Election of Chairman of Committees, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 454 Election of School Committees and Education Boards, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 633 Ellesmere Railway-station, h., q. (Mr. Lawry). 623 Engineers' Certificates, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 633 Exclusion of Strangers, h., q. (Mr. Symes), 150 Exportation of Arms Bill, I.c., 1R. 640 ; 2R. 661 Vol. 119. Easton, Herbert E., h., Rep. Sel. Com. 838 Education Board Reserves, h., q. (Mr. Flat- man), 201 Education Boards Election Bill, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 647 : h., 2R. 359 ; Com., 3R. 561 Egmont County Bill, l.c., 2R., 3R. 876 : h., 1B. 96 ; 2R., 3R. 745 Egmont National Park Bill, I.c .. 1R. 389 ; 22. 579 ; 3R. 947 : h., 2B. 280; 3R. 351 Election of Chairman of Committees, I.c., m. (Hon. Captain Baillie), 65 Elective Land Boards, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 327 Elliotte, R. H., h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 902 Endowments for Primary Education, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. T. Kelly), 1151 English Sunday Closing-hours, &c., h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 102 Epuni Settlement, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 112 Evidence Further Amendment Bill, I.c., 1R. 389 ; 2R. 446 ; 3R. 832 : h., 2B. 276 ; Com., 3R. 359 Excessive Drinking by Maoris, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 586 ; q. (Mr. Kaibau), 597 Execution of Criminals : Press Representation. h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 325 Explanation, Personal, h., Obs. (Mr. Mere- ditb), 950 Exportation of Arms Bill, l.c., 3R. 1 Export Duty on Balk Timber, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 592; q. (Mr. Flatman), 895 F. Vol. 116. Factories Bill, h., 1R. 30 Fairfax Stationmaster, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder). 403 Fairlie Railway-platform, h., q. (Major Stew- ard), 246 
<page>1339</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1379</url>
Farmers' Union, h., Obs. (Mr. Monk), 376 Federation Commission Report, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 198 Fiji, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 374 ; m. (Mr. Seddon), 588 Fiji, Annexation of, h., q. (Captain Russell), 242 Fish-hatcheries, h., q. (Major Steward), 184 Flag-station at Kelvin Grove, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 594 Food-stuffs for South Africa, h., m. (Mr. Monk), 230 Free Railway-passes, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 230 Fulloon, E. M., l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. W. Kelly), 611 ## Vol. 117. Factories Bill, h., 2R. 178 Falconer, John, and Others, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 244 Featherston County Bill, 1R. 434 Fiji, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 296; q. (Mr. Fisher), 473 Financial Statement, h., q. (Captain Russell), 246 ; m. (Mr. Seddon), 443, 617, 662 Fire Brigades Bill, h., 1R. 82 Flax-grader for Wellington, h., q. (Mr. Field), 308 Flour-millers' Association, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 480 Freehold Estates, h., m. (Mr. Herries), 296 Freight on Cocoanut Oil-cake, h., q. (Mr. Carncross), 510 ## Vol. 118. Fiji, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 614 Financial Statement, h., m. 1, 46, 77, 95, 151, 207, 226, 278, 484, 506 Findt, Maria, h., q. (Mr. Colvin), 620 Firemen's Certificates, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 633 Foreign Companies : Payment of Stamp-tax, h., m. (Mr. Fowlds), 597 Foreign Companies trading in New Zealand, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 657 Fraser, Hector, h .. q. (Mr. Monk), 624 Fraser, The late Mr. M. J. S. Mackenzie and Colonel, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 558 Fraser, The late Colonel, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 562 Friendly Societies, I.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Jennings), 640 Fulloon, Emily Maria, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 657 Funeral of the late President Mckinley, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 563 ### Vol. 119. Factories Bill, l.c., 1R. 389 ; 2R. 446; m. 1004; Com. 1015, 1073; 3R. 1075; Message 1085, 1170, 1200 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 331 ; Com. 339; 3R. 362; m. (Mr. Seddon), 1168, 1188, 1219 Fair Rent Bill, h., q. (Major Steward), 112; Dis. 389 Farmers' Union, h., q. (Mr. Field), 108 Featherston County Bill, l c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 870 : h., 2R., 3R. 745 Federation Commission, h, q. (Mr. Fisher), 191, 900 Fire Brigades Bill, h., Dis. 389 Fisheries Encouragement Bill, l.c., 1R. 579; 2R. 648; 3R. 701 : h., 1R. 311 ; 2R. 351 ; Com., 3R. 561 Fitzgerald, William Crothers, l.c , m. (Hon. Mr. Jenkinson), 579 Flax Grading and Export Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1199 ; h., 1R., 2B., 3R. 1240 Flynn, John, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 278 Food Trusts Bill, h., m. 840; 1R. 842; Dis. 1085 Forest Gate Estate. h., q. (Captain Russell), 362 ; q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 589 Forest Planting, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 318 Forest Reserves, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 108 Freehold, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 601 Free Railway. passes for School-children, h , q. (Mr Meredith), 322 G. Vol. 116. Gaming and Lotteries Bill, h., 1R. 182 Goldfields and Mines Committee, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 668 Gold-mining Industry, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 665 Grain-sacks, Weight of, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 593 ## Vol. 117. Gaming and Lotteries Bill, l.c., 1R. 492 Garrison Artillery Officer, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 20 Gasworks Compulsory Purchasing, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 250 Gisborne Anchorage, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 516 Gladstone Association, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 308 Government Advances to Settlers Extension Bill, I.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 592 : h., 2R. 191; Com. 491; Cons. of Amend. 569 ; 3R. 591 Government Advertisements, h., m. (Mr Massey), 83 Government Arch, h., q. (Hon. Mr. Arkwright), 289 Government and Ocean Accident Insurance Premiums, h., q. (Mr. S) mes), 253 Government Balnealogist, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 304 Government Works in Hawke's Bay, h., q. (Mr. A. L. D. Fraser), 477 Governor of Fiji, Speech of, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 89 Grey District Hospital and Charitable Aid Board, h., q. (Mr. Guinness), 305 Greytown Reserves Vesting and Disposal En- abling Bill, h., 1R. 503 Vol. 118. Gisborne Appointment to Upper House, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 623 Government Loans to Local Bodies Act, h., q. Mr. Hogg), 611 
<page>1340</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1380</url>
Gaming and Lotteries Bill, h., Dis. 389 Gaming and Lottery Permits, h., m. (Mr. Mere- dith), 145 Gaol Warders, h., m. (Mr. Hutcheson), 146 Gauntlett, Mrs. Charity W., h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 587 Gore Cemetery Reserves Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 875: h., Rep. Sel. Com. 510; 2R., 3R. 745 Government Railway Time - table, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 906 Government Railways Department Classifica- tion Bill, h., 1R. 509 ; q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 750; Dis. 887 Government Railways Department Classifica- tion Bill (No. 2), I.c., 1R. 1073; 2R. 1082; 3R. 1083 : h., m. 907 ; 1R. 907; 2R. 1024; Com. 1033, 1072; 3R. 1073; Cons. of Amend. 1160 Government Railways Superannuation Bill, h., 1R. 509; Dis. 1085 Government Railways Superannuation Fund Bill, h., Dis. 1085 Government Service Appointments and Pro- motions, h., m. (Mr. Fisher), 887 Governor, His Excellency the, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 898 Graduated Receipt-stamp and Cheque Duty, h., q. (Mr. Lawry), 322 Grand Hotel Fire, Auckland, h., q. (Mr. Field), 100 Greytown Reserves Vesting and Disposal En- abling Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 870 : h., 2R., 3R. 745  H. Vol. 116. Hanmer Springs, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 32   Hansard Reprints, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 600 Harbour Board Charges, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 597 Heddon Bush Estate, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 377 Hokitika Harbour Board Loan, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 405 Homes for Incurables, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 594 Hotchkiss Guns, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 34 Hornby, Islington, and Templeton Railway Services, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 591 Horowhenua Village Settlement, h., q. (Mr. Field), 416 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, l.c., 1R. 24; 2R. 179 ; Com. 278; m. 328; 3R. 365 : h., 1R. 373 Hours of Sitting, h., Obs. (Mr. Speaker), 279 Humbert, King of Italy, Assassination of, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 179 ; h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 183 Hundred Line Siding, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 402 Hurunui River Bridge, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 389 Vol. 117. Railway-station, h., q. (Captain Hastings Russell), 512 Hansard Reprints, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 98 Health Officer for Waimate, h., q. (Major Steward), 297 Health Officer, Hawke's Bay, h., q. (Mr. Hall), 301 Health Officer, Wellington, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Jenkinson), 173 Hillside Workshops, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 511 Hokitika Harbour Board Empowering Bill, h., 1R. 373 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, h., 2R. 387 ; Com. 441, 490; Cons. of Amend. 613; 3R. 614 Hotel Licenses, h., q. (Mr. Lawry), 253 Vol. 118. Hansard, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 634 Hansard, Departmental Statements in, h., m. 224 Hospital and Charitable Aid Boards, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jenkinson), 500 Hospital Nurses Registration Bill, I.c., Cons. of Amend. 202 Vol. 119. Habitual Inebriates, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 99 Halswell Post-office, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 906 Harbours, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 320 Hawera Borough and Public Trustee Enabling Bill, h., 1R. 389 Hikurangi Volunteer Corps, h., q. (Mr. R. Thompson), 193 Hokitika Harbour Board Endowment Bill, I.c., 1R. 729 ; 2B., 3R. 876 : h., 2R., 3R. 751 Holmes, Death of the Hon. Mr., I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 39; h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 45 Horses imported by New Zealand Government, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 186 Hospitals and Charitable Aid Boards Election Bill, h., 1R. 351 ; 2R. 561 ; Dis. 1085 Hunua Coal Area, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 600 I. Vol. 116. Imperial Honours, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Feld- wick), 174 Imperial Troops, Visit of, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 374 Importation of Big Game, h., q. (Mr. Flat- man), 194 Imported Railway Passenger-carriages, h., m. (Mr. Hogg), 182 Impounding Bill, h., 1R. 182 Impounding Bill (No. 2), h., 1R. 182 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 1), l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 12: h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 13; 1R. 22 ; 2B .. 3R. 24 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 2), I.c., 1R .. 2R., 3B. 673: h., m. 673 ; 1R., 2R. 694 ; 3R. 696 Improvements on Unimproved Lands, h., 9. (Mr. Bollard), 415 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 401 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, h., 1R. 230; 2R. 333 
<page>1341</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1381</url>
Vol. 116-continued. Industrial Disputes, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. McLean), 611 Inglewood, Stock-loading Yards for, h., q. (Mr. Symes), 590 Inquests, Conduct of, h., q. (Mr. Field), 593 Inspection of Pigs, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 413 Inspection of Private Schools, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Feldwick), 612 Inspectors of Schools Bill, h., 1R. 373 Invercargill Police-station, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 407 Invercargill Reserve Leasing Bill, h., 1B. 182 ; 2R. 468 Islington, Hornby, and Templeton Railway Servicer, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 591 Vol. 117. Immigration of Domestic Servants, h., q. (Mr. Guinness), 20 Imperial or Colonial Naval Reserve, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 482 Imperial Trade Zollverein, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 14 Importation of Bones and Bonedust, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 104 Importation of Saddlery, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 13 Imported Stud Horses, h., q. (Mr. Bennet), 347 Imported Stud Stock, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 314 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 3). l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 592 : h., m. 595 ; 1R., 2R., 3R. 619 "Imprisonment for Debt Limitation Act, 1900," h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 26 Inangahua River Bridge, h., q. (Mr. Colvin), 103 Increase of Salaries to Deputy Registrars, h., Q. (Mr. Field), 307 Inebriates' Institutions, h., q. (Major Steward), 19 Infant Mortality, h., q. (Major Steward), 300 Inspection of Buildings, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 304 Invercargill Railway station, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 489 Invercargill Reserve Leasing Bill, l.c., 18. 70; 2R. 335 : h., 3R. 12 ## Vol. 118. Imported Railway-carriages, I.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Bowen), 398 Informal Petitions, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jenkin- son), 292 Invercargill Reserve Leasing Bill, I.c., 3R. 687 Vol. 119. Imported Rolling-stock, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 855 Impounding Bill (No. 1), h., Dis. 389 Impounding Bill (No. 2), h., Dis. 389 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 4), I.c., 1R., 2R., 3B. 39 : h., 1R., 2R. 46; 3R. 48 Imprest Supply Bill (No. 5), l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 870 : h., m. 855; 1R., 2R., 3R. 859 Inch.Clutha Road, River, and Drainage Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 876 : h., 1R. 651 ; 2R., 3R. 745 Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, h., q. (Mr. Willis), 593 v-116-119. ### Vol. 119-continued. Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill, l.c., 1R. 180; 2R. 235; q. (Hon. Mr. Rigg), 307 ; m. 649, 702, 729; Com. 745, 786 ; m. 833, 838; 3R. 916; Cons. of Amend. 1035 : h., m. 166 ; Com. 167; 3R. 169 Industrial Home, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 168 Injured Members of Contingents, l.c., q. (Hon. Major Harris), 1003 Inspection of Coal mines, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 200 Inspection of Machinery Bill, I.c., 1R. 579 ; 2R. 649 ; 3R. 729 : h., 2R. 560; Com., 3R. 561 Inspection of Meat, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Jones), 915 Inspector of Prisons, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 599 Inspectors of Schools Bill, h., Dis. 389 Interest and Sinking Fund, h., m. (Mr. Graham), 146 J. Vol. 116. Judicial Appointments, Terms of, h., q. (Mr. Hornsby), 194 Vol. 117. Junior Civil Service Examination-papers, h., q. (Mr. Guinness), 307 Juvenile Smoking Suppression Bill, h., 1R. 434 Vol. 118. Judgments of High Court of Rarotonga, h., q. (Mr. Horries), 611 Vol. 119. Johnsonville, Close Settlement at, h., q. (Mr. Field), 897 Judges, Superannuation of, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 199 Juvenile Smoking Suppression Bill, h., Dis. 389 K. Vol. 116. Kaikoura Daily Mail-service, h., q. (Mr. Mere- dith), 593 Kaipara Flats-Wellsford Railway, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 33 Kaipara Railway, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 598 Kapua Settlement, h., q. (Major Steward), 607 Kelly Suicide, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 412 Kelvin Grove, Flag-station at, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 594 King Humbert, Assassination of, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 179; h., m. (Mr. Sed- don), 183 Kurow Public Buildings, h., q. (Major Stew- ard), 403 Vol. 117. Kaikora North Railway-station, h., q. (Captain Russell), 512 Kaikoura Fish Industry, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 517 
<page>1342</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1382</url>
Vol. 117-continued. Kaikoura Mounted Rifles, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 18 Kiourangi Point Lighthouse, h., q. (Mr. R. Mckenzie), 99 Kairanga County Bill, h., 1R. 82 Kerr, The late Hon. J., h., m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 637 Kerse, Charles, and Others, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 472 Kiwitea County Council Offices Bill, h., 1R. 532 Vol. 118. Kaikorai Valley, Railway for, h., q. (Mr. Bar- olay), 650 Kaituna Postal Arrangements, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 630 Kerr, Death of the Hon. J., l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 149 Kingi, Tewi, and Others, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 656 Vol. 119. Kairanga County Bill, I.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 880 : h., 1R., 2R. 745 Kapuatohe and Kaimahi Blocks, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 898 Kayes, J. W., h., q. (Mr. Massey), 109 Kelsey's Bush, h., q. (Major Steward), 114 Kerosene and Paraffine-wax, Bonus on, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 896 Kerr, The late Hon. J., h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 243 King's Coronation, Representation of New Zea- land at the, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 901 Kirk's " Forest Flora," h., q. (Mr. Lethbridge), 111 Kiwitea County Council Offices Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 877 : h., 2R., 3R. 745   Korokoro Settlement, Road to, h., q. (Mr. Wil- ford), 328 L. Vol. 116. Labour Bills Committee, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 276 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, h., 18. 182 ; 2R. 230 Land for Settlement in the King-country, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 191 Land for Settlements Act, h., m. (Mr. Fowlds), 378 Land for Settlements Aots, h., m. (Mr. Mere- ditb), 182 Land for Settlements Bill, l.c., 1R. 665 : h., 1R. 495 ; m. 495; 2R. 508, 552; Com. 574, 608; m. 616; Com. 620; 3R. 620 Landless Natives in South Island, h., m. (Mr. Parata), 182 Land-sales, h., m. (Mr. Fowlds), 874 Land Transfers, Registration of, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 248 Law Amendment Bill, l.c., 1R. 225; 2R. 852 : h., 1R. 30 Leave of Absence, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 374 Levin Post-office, h., q. (Mr. Stevens), 594 Liability for Workmen's Homes, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 248 Vol. 116 - continued. Libel Bill, h., 1R. 30; 2R. 230 Libel Law, h., q. (Mr. R. Thompson), 494 Licenses to sell Guns and Ammunition, h., q. (Mr. Monk), Licensing Act, h., q. (Mr. Carncross), 380 Licensing Bill, h., 1. 616 Lillywhite, Charles, h., q. (Mr. Hutcheson), 191 Limitation of Profite and Prevention of Rings and Combines Bill, h., 1R. 182 Lincoln Agricultural College, h., q. (Mr. Mere- dith), 377 Local Authorities Indemnity Bill, l.c., 1R. 276 ; 2R. 328 ; 3R. 332: h., 1R. 12; 2R. 199; Com., 3R. 266 Local Boards for Government Advances, h., Q. (Mr. Barolay), 382 Local Bodies' Loans, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 379 Local Option Poll in King-country, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 185 Looney, Thomas, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 407 Lower Road to Seatoun, h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 240 "L" Wagons for Nelson-Motupiko Railway, h., q. (Mr. R. Mckenzie), 590 Lyttelton Borough Empowering Bill, h., 1R. 373 Vol. 117. Lake Ellesmere, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 93 Land for Settlements Act, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Ormond), 463, 499 Land for Settlements Bill, I.c., 2R. 79 ; m. 335 ; 3R. 360 : Cons. of Amend. 502 : h. Cons. of Amend. 490, 522 Lands and Survey Report, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Ormond), 290 Land taken for Drainage Purposes, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 346 Large Estates, Return re, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 485 Law Consolidation, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 17 Lawrence Railway Offices, h., q. (Mr. Bennet), 305 Leases in Perpetuity, h., m. (Mr. McNab), 82 ; m. (Mr. Hutobeson), 296 Levels and Waimate Counties Boundaries Bill, h., 1R. 503 Levin and Weraroa Townships, h., q. (Mr. Field), 312 Libel Bill (No. 1), h., 2R. 163 Library Recess Committee Report, L.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Feldwick), 360 Licensing Law, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 248 Lime-burning, Albury Estate, h., Q. (Mr. Flatman), 311 Lime for the West Coast, h., g. (Mr. Leth- bridge), 309 Liquor-selling in King-country, h., q. (Mr. Lawry), 14 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, h., 1. 342, 523 Local Bodies' Valuations, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 94 Local Government Bill Committee, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 297 Lunatic Asylum Attendants' Pay, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 514 Lunatic Asylum Employes, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 516 
<page>1343</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1383</url>
Vol. 118. Landless Maoris in Waikato, h., q. (Mr. Kaibau), 654 Law Amendment Bill, l.c., m. 594; Com. 596, 688 Lee, Mr., late Inspector of Schools, Welling- ton, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 633 Library Accommodation, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Rigg), 687 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 646 Licensing Bill, h., 1R. 644 Lighthouse, Cape Brett, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 650 Limitation of Profits and Prevention of Rings and Combines Bill, h., 1R. 460 Liquor Licenses in King-country, h., q. (Mr. Lawry), 613 ## Vol. 119. Labour Day, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 235 Lake Ellesmere, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Taiaroa), 235 Lambs destroyed by Seagulls, h., q. (Mr. Flat- man), 906 Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 201 ; Rep. Sel. Com. 243; Dis. 389 Land Bill, h., 1R. 187, 1207 Land Boards, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 588 Land Boards, Elective, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 327 Land for Workmen's Homes, h., q. (Mr. Withe-  ford), 109 Land-tax and Income-tax Bill, I.c., 1R., 2R. 785 ; 3R. 786: h., 1R. 509 ; 2R. 753; 3R. 762 Land Settlement, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 152 Land Transfer Assurance Fund, l.c., m. (Hon. Colonel Pitt), 93 Land Valuation Act, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 159 Law Amendment Bill, I.c., 3R. 93: h., 1R. 96; Dis. 187, 389 Lawrence-Roxburgh Road, h., q. (Mr. Bennet), 105 Legislative Council Appointments, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 188; q. (Mr. Lang), 190: q. (Mr. Heke), 191; q. (Mr. Herries), 191; q. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 192 ; q. (Mr. MoNab), 192; q. (Mr. Colvin), 317; q. (Mr. Monk), 595; q. (Mr. Bollard), 596 Leslie, W. D., h., q. (Mr. Houston), 106 Levels and Waimate Counties Boundaries Bill, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 40 ; 2R. 752; Com. 753 Levin Experimental Station, h., q. (Mr. Field), 110 Libel Bill (No. 2), h., Dis. 389 Library, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Rigg), 1200; h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 312 Library Fund, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Rigg), 308 ; h., m. (Mr. Fisher), 243 Licensing Act, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 899 Light-line Railways Bill, h., 1. 1207 Lime, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 201 Lime for Farmers, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 111 Lime-kilns, Maheno, h., m. (Mr. Millar), 311 Limitation of Profits and Prevention of Rings and Combines Bill, h., Dis. 389 Little River and Lincoln Railway, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 163 Vol. 119-continued. Loans to Local Bodies, h., m. (Mr. Millar), 187 Local Bills, l.c., m. 880; h., m. (Mr. Pirani), 852 Local Bills Committees, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 446 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill (Mr. Palmer's), h., Dis. 714 Local Bodies' Goldfields Public Works and Loans Bill, l.c., 1R. 701 ; 2R. 832; 8R. 1075 : h., 1R. 448; 2R. 680 ; Com., 3R. 700 Local Bodies' Loans Bill, l.c., 1B. 785; 2R. 132, 1075; m. 1171 : h., 1R. 448; 2R. 762; Com. 767 ; 3R. 769, Amend. 1176 Long-service Medals, h., q. (Mr. Carnoross), 896 Lunatic Asylum Attendants, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 320 Lyttelton Borough Council Empowering Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3B. 876 : h., 2B , 3R 745 Lyttelton Forts, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 192 M. Vol. 116. Main East Road, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 409 Mangonui, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 381 Manukau Harbour, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 388 Maori Art, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 195 Marine Charts, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 390 Masterton-Waipukurau Loop-line of Railway, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 184 Military Drill in Schools, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 240 Milk-vans, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 247 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, h., 1R. 30; 2R. 696 Mining Companies Law, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 603 Ministerial Travelling Allowances and Ex. penses, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 373 Ministers' Travelling-expenses, h., q. (Captain Russell), 378 Money-lenders Bill, h., 1R. 182 Morning Sittings, h., m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 249 Mornington, Post-and-Telegraph Office for, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 245 Mortgages, h., m. (Major Steward), 182 Mortgages of Land Bill, I.c., 1R. 326; h., 1R. 30 Morven Railway-shed, h., q. (Major Steward), 385 Morven Wesleyan Church Site, h., q. (Major Steward), 607 Mount Cook Hermitage, h., q. (Major Steward), 384 Mount Egmont Railway, h., q. (Mr. Symes), 597 Mount Egmont Sanatorium, h., q. (Mr. Symes), 245 Vol. 117. Mackenzie and Duntroon Rifles, h., q. (Major Steward), 16 Mackenzie and Geraldine Counties Boundaries Alteration Bill, h., 1R. 434 Maheno Lime-kilns, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 82 Mail-delivery, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 90 Makohine Viaduct, h., q. (Mr. Lawry), 344 ; m. (Mr. Massey), 349; q. (Mr. Field), 516 
<page>1344</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1384</url>
Makuri-Pongaroa Road, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 315 Manaia Magistrate's Court, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 520 Mangatoro Estate, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 15, 89 Maori Lands Administration Bill, h., IR. 532 Maori History and Art, h., q. (Captain Russell), 247 Maori Names of Railway-stations, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 513 Maruia Hot Springs, h., q. (Mr. Colvin), 102 Masterton Cadet Corps and Rifle Club, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 475 Masterton Courthouse, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 312 Matakanui Lands for Settlement, h., q. (Mr. Bennet), 252 Mckenzie, Sir John, Death of, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 281 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 280, 285 McDonnell, The late Constable L., h., Rep. Sel. Com. 532 MoLean's Railway - station, h., q. (Major Steward), 90 Members of Returned Contingents, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 89 Mercer Railway station. h., q. (Mr. Lang), 512 Merrivale Estate, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 473 Midland Railway Debenture-holders, h., q. (Mr. Grabam), 17 Military Pensions Board, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 473 Military Pensions Extension Aot, h., q. (Major Steward), 480 Mine-managers' Certificates, h., q. (Mr. E. G.  Allen), 308 Money-lenders Bill, h., 2R. 412 Mortgage-tax, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 21 Mortgages of Land Bill, I.c., 2R. 176 ; h., 2R. 379 Municipal Corporations Act, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 249 ; q. (Mr. Hall), 486 Municipal Markets, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 20 ## Vol. 118. Mackenzie and Geraldine Counties Boundaries Alteration Bill, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 619 Mackenzie, The late Mr. M. J. S., I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 558 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 560 Mail - trains : Onehunga and Auckland, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 628 Mangonui Mounted Infantry, h., q. (Mr. Hous- ton), 610 Maori Carvings and Curios, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 621 Maori Hostelry at the Bluff, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 657 Maori Relics Bill, h., 1R. 204 Married Men in Permanent Forces, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 612 Mckenzie, Sir John, Death of, l.c., Obs. (Hon. the Speaker), 149 McKinley, President: Attempted Assassination, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 399 : h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 339 ; m. (Mr. Seddon), 462 Mckinley, President, Death of, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 557 : h., m. (Mr. Sed- don), 559 Mckinley, President, Funeral of, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 596 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 563 Members' Election Expenses, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 610 Military Pensions Act, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 610 Minera' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, l.c., 1R. 640 ; 2R. 689 : h., 3R. 597 Minera' Rights Fees, I.c., m. (Hcn. Mr. Bolt), 687 Mines Statement, h., 570 Mining Bill, h., 1R. 460 Ministers' Travelling-allowances, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 613 Money-lenders Bill, h., Com. 659 Morning Sittings, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 470 Mortgages of Land Bill, I.c., 1R., Dis. 640 ; 2B. 662 : h., Com., 3R. 635 Morven Trains and Mails, h., q. (Major Steward), 623 Mussel Bay Railway-crossing, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 624 Vol. 119. Mackay, Mrs. James, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 190 Mackenzie Mounted Rifles, Drill-shed for, h .. q. (Major Steward), 594 Maerewhenua Bridge, h., q. (Major Steward), 114 Mabeno Lime-kilns, h., m. (Mr. Millar), 311 Manawatu Railway, h., q. (Mr. Field), 189 Manawatu Railway Sale and Purchase Em- powering Bill, l.c., 1R. 1199 ; 2R., 3R. 1204 : h., Int., 1R., 2R. 1230; Com., 3R. 1238 Mangaweka Bridge, h., q. (Mr. Lethbridge), 111 Maori Antiquities Bill, I.c., 1B. 265 ; 28. 347; 3B. 389 Maori Census, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 322 Maori Councils Bill, I.c., 1R. 785; 2. 835: h., 1R. 840; 2R., 3R. 1208 Maori Degradation, Petition re, h., Obs. 389 Maori Hostelries, h., q. (Mr. Heke), 197 Maori Land, h., m. (Mr. Kaihan), 187 Maori Lands Administration Bill, I.c., 1R. 1073; 2R. 1075; m., Com. 1152; 3R. 1157; h., 2R. 557; m. 715, 750, 913, 954 ; Com. 1003, 1057 ; 8R. 1060, Cons. of Amend. 1161 Maori Leaflets, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 104 Maori Relics Bill, I.c., 1R. 265; 2R. 347 ; 3R. 389 : h., 2R. 216; Com. 278; 3R. 279 Maoris, Railway Concessions to, h. q., (Mr. Kaihau), 198 Masterton Public Park Management Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R. 877 ; 3R. 880 : h., 1R. 40 ; 2B., 3R. 745 Mauriceville Lime-works, h., q. (Mr. H gg), 153 McDonald, Mrs. E. H., h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 902 Meat Companies, Ministerial Interest in, h .. q. (Mr. Field), 192 Medical Comforts for the Wellington Gaols, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 99 Medical Practitioners Bill, h., 1R. 389; Dis. 1085 
<page>1345</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1385</url>
Vol. 119-continued. Members of Parliament in Public Positions, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 588 Messengers and Orderlies, h., q. (Major Steward), 900 Midland Railway, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 311 Midland Railway Company, h., m. (Mr. Fisher), 1086, 1228 Military Pensions Bill, l.c., 1R. 1169; 2R., 3R. 1173 : h., Int. 448; 1R. 449; 2R. 723 ; Com., 3R. 1168 Milk-testing, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 103 Milk-tests in Dairy Factories, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), q. 113 Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill, l.c., Com., 3R. 445 Mining Bill, I.c 1R., 2R., 3R. 1199: h., 2R. 1180; Com. 1182 ; 3R. 1183 Ministerial Expenses, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 1020 Ministerial Interest in Meat Companies, h., q. (Mr. Field), 192 Mokau River Scenery, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 116 Monday Sittings, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 187 Money-lenders Bill, l.c., 1R. 145; 2R. 181, 236; Com. 310, 351 ; m. 445; 3R. 509: h., Cons. of Amend. 116, 511 " Monowai," Missing Steamer, l.c., q. (Hon. Colonel Pitt), 702 Morris Tubes, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 318 Mortgages of Land Bill, l.c., m. 180; Com. 181 ; 3R. 234 : h., Cons. of Amend. 331 Municipal Corporations Act, h., q. (Mr. Ell),  162 Municipalisation of Public Services, h., 1. (Mr. Ell), 162 N. Vol. 116. Native Affairs Committee Petitions, h., m. (Mr. Carroll), 507 Native Bush Reserves, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 418 Native Land Court, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 190 Nelson-Motupiko Railway, "L" Wagons for, h., q. (Mr. R. Mckenzie), 590 New Commandant of the Forces, l.c., Obs. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 326 ; h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 279 New Gaol for Invercargill, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 606 New Member, l.c., 276 ; h., 552, 616 New Members, l.c., 12, 276 New Railway-station for Kaiapoi, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 385 " Newtown Park Scandal," h., q. (Mr. Monk), 33 New Zealand Ensign, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 239 New Zealand Ensign Bill, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 13 Ngatikuia and Rangitane Hapus, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 603 Nightcaps Stationmaster, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 590 North Auckland Railway Extension, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 389 Northern Maori District, h., Election of Mem- ber, 5 North Island Main Trunk Railway, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 388 Vol. 116-continued. North Island Main Trunk Railway Viaducts, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 597 Noxious Weeds Act, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 416 Noxious Weeds Bill, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 415 ## Vol. 117. Native Land Administration Act, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 518 Native Land Titles, h., m. (Mr. Herries), 296 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, h., 1R. 532 New Hebrides Islands, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Smith), 173 New Zealand Ensign Bill, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 88; 1R. 141 Nine-mile Punt, Buller River, h., q. (Mr. Colvin), 103 Nurses Registration Bill. [See Hospital.] Vol. 118. Napier Maori Club Reserve l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Tomoana), 587 Native Affairs Committee's Recommendations, h., q. (Mr. Pere), 653; q. (Mr. Kaihau), 657 Newtown Park, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 615 New Zealand Forces : "General Orders," h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 609 New Zealand Products in London Market, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 623 New Zealand University Bill, h., 1R. 693 North Canterbury Volunteer Corps, h. q. (Mr. Buddo), 621 Vol. 119. Native Birds of New Zealand, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 319 Native Civil List, h., m. (Mr. Pirani), 887 Native Land Claims Adjustment and Laws Amendment Bill, l.c., 1R. 1199; 2R. 1202; 3R. 1204 : h., 1R. 745; 2R. 1221; Com. 1223 ; 3R. 1224 Native Timber, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 601 Nelson Harbour Board Bill, I.c., 1R. 1199; 2R., 3R. 1202 : h., 2R. 1179; Rep. Sel. Com. 1188; 2R. 1191 ; Com. 1196, 1219; 3R. 1220 New Business after Midnight, h., Obs. (Mr. Speaker), 4 New Zealand: Colony or State, h., Q. (Mr. Napier), 315 New Zealand Contingents: Casualties, h., m. (Mr. McNab), 146 New Zealand Ensign Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1169: h., 2R. 575; m. (Mr. Seddon), 715; Com. 1163; 3R. 1164 New Zealand Railways, h., m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 1159 New Zealand Railways Repairs, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 887 New Zealand Timber, Export Duty on, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 895 New Zealand Troopers' Horses, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 194 New Zealand University Bill, h., Dis. 389 Ngatikuia Tribe, Reserves for, h., q. (Mr. Pa- rata), 115 North Canterbury Volunteer Officers, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 186 
<page>1346</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1386</url>
North Island Main Trunk Railway, h., Obs. (Mr. Hall-Jones), 894 North of Auckland Railway, h., m. (Mr. Withe- ford), 1240 Noxious Weeds, h., q. (Mr. R. MoKenzie), 115 Noxious Weeds Act, h., q. (Mr. Lethbridge), 111 Nutt, Mrs. L. J., h., q. (Mr. Stevens), 202 ## O. Vol. 116. Oamaru-Kurow Railway, h., q. (Major Steward), 245 Oats for South Africa, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 230; m. (Mr. Meredith), 373 O'Brien, Sir G., and New Zealand, h., q. (Cap- tain Russell), 552 Old-age Pensions, h., q. (Mr. Colvin), 186 Old-age Pensions Regulations, h., m. (Mr. Sed- don), 13 Oliver, Hon. R., Resignation of, l.c., 12 Omaka Investigation Bill, h., 1R. 616 Opening of Parliament, l.c., 1 ; h., 4, 12 Opium Importations, h., q. (Mr. Guinness), 383 Orchard and Garden Pests Bill, h., 1R. 30 Order of Business, h., Obr. (Mr. Speaker), 374 Otamita, Stock-loading Yards at, h., q. (Mr. McNab), 402 Otautau Telephonic Communication with Lakes, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 402 Overcoats for Volunteers, h., q. (Mr. Carncross), 190 ## Vol. 117. Oats for South Africa, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 342 O'Connor, Michael, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 22 Oeo Point Lighthouse, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 513 Officers of Local Bodies, h., m. (Mr. Hogg), 82 O'd, John, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 503 Old Soldiers' and Sailors' Claims, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 251 Opium Prohibition Bill, h., 1R. 595 Orepuki-Waiau-Longwood, h., q. (Mr. Gilfed- der), 104 Ostrich-farming, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 102 Vol. 118. Ocean Beach Public Domain Bill, h., 1R. 460 Old-age Pensions, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 606 ; q. (Mr. Herries), 612 Old-age Pensions Bill, h., 1R. 559 Onehunga and Auckland Mail-trains, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 628 Orderlies at Parliament House, h., q. (Mr. Hornsby). 609 Otago Central Railway : Railway-siding, h. q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 631 Owens, Patrick J., h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 652 Vol. 119. Oats for South Africa, h., m. (Mr. Meredith), 146 Ocean Beach Public Domain Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 876 : h., 2R., 3R. 745 Ocean Mail-services, h., m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 454, 514; Com. 545 Oeo Native Land, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 196 Officers of Parliament, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 4 Old-age Pensions Act, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 188 Old-age Pensions Bill, I.c., 1B. 701; 28. 836 ; Com. 886; Recom. 946, 1004; 3R. 1004; Cons. of Amend. 1169: h., 2R. 673; Com. 679; 3R. 680 : Cons. of Amend. 1162, 1168, 1188 Opium Prohibition Bill, I.c., 1R. 389 ; 2R. 447; 3R. 509 : h., 2R. 306; 3R. 351 Opposed Returns, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 316 Orari-Timaru Railway, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 331 Orchard and Garden Pests Bill, h., Dis. 389 Order of Business, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 595; Obs. (Mr. Deputy-Speaker), 602; m. (Mr. 1 Seddon), 714 Otago Central Railway Rates, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 330 Otaki Native School Reserve, h., q. (Mr. Field), 323 Otara Bridge, h., q. (Mr. Lethbridge), 104 Otekaike Estate, h., q. (Major Steward). 115 Oyster-fisheries, Auckland, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds). 321 P. Vol. 116. Palmerston North Reserves Bill, h., 1R. 586 Pareora Water-race, h., q. (Major Steward), 608 Patea Electorate, h., m. (Mr. Seddon.), 30 Patea Harbour Board Bill, h., 1R. 30 Payment of Railway Ballast gangs, h., q. (Mr. Piranı), 405 Pedlars and Hawkers Bill, h., 1R. 182 ; 2R. 479 Periodical Railway Returns, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 591 Personal Explanation, l.c. (Hon. Captain Baillie), 364 Petonc Station and Hutt Railway, h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 246 Plumping at Elections, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 596 Police Administration, m. (Supply) 673 Police Offences Bill, l.c., 1R. 276, 491 ; 2R. 671 : h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 268; Com. 392 ; 3R. 507 Police Protection at St. Andrew's, h., q. (Major Steward), 408 Police Regulations, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 408 Portfolios and Departments of Ministers, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 186 Post and-Telegraph Office for Mornington, h., q. (Mr. Arnold), 245 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill. i .. 2R. 586 Prevention of Employment of Women in Dan. gerous Trades Bill, h., 1R. 279 Prisons Department, h., m. (Mr. Arnold), 231 Proclamation of the King, h., q. (Mr. Herries). 236 Property Law Bill, l.c., 1R. 326 ; h., 1R. 30 Provision for Injured Constables, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 197 Public Health Bill, I.c., 1B. 459 ; 2R. 492; 3R. 576 : h., 1R. 30; 2R. 360 ; Com. 392; 3R. 392 ; m. (Mr. Ward), 608 Public Health Regulations, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 406 
<page>1347</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1387</url>
Paikakariki Road, h., q. (Mr. Field), 309 Passages to Great Britain for New Zealand Troopers, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 31 Passenger Steamers between Australia and New Zealand, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 13 Patea Harbour Bill, h., 2R. 47 Patent Rights, h., q. (Mr. Lawry), 312 Payment of Members, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 29 Penny Postage for Newspapers, h., q. (Major Steward), 92 Police Offences Bill, l.c., Com. 176 ; 3R. 237 : h., m. (Mr. McGowan), 254 Police Report of 1901, h .. q. (Mr. Fisher), 520 Port Albert, Sly-grog Selling at, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 93 Porter, Ralph, h., q. (Major Steward), 489 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, l.c., 1R. 421 ; 2R. 463 : h., m. (Mr. McNab), 434; 3R. 437 Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 299 Privilege, h., Obs. (Mr. Pirani), 83 Promissory Oaths Bill, h., 1R. 12; 2R. 396 Public Accounts Committee, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 534 Public Debt of the Colony, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 83 Public Servants and Local Bodies, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 18 Vol. 118. Pahiatua District Court, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 658  Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, h., 1R. 559 Physical Drill in Public and Native Schools Bill, l.c., 3R. 588 : h., m. (Mr. Buddo), 615 Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Bill, l.c., 3R. 398 Privilege, Breach of, h., Obs. (Mr. Herries), 66 ; Rep. Sel. Com. 271 ; m. (Mr. Seddon), 339 ; Inter. Deb. 407 ; m. (Mr. Hornsby), 465, 506 Privilege Tickets, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell) 630 Promissory Oaths Bill, I.c., 1R. 640 ; 2R. 663 : h., Com., 3R. 635 Public Health Inspectors, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 629 Public Loans Return, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 621 Vol. 119. Pacific Cable, h., q. (Mr. A. L. D. Fraser), 509 Paeroa River, h., q. (Mr. Palmer), 200 Palmerston North Post - office, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 906 Palmerston North Reserve Bill, l.c., 1R. 729; 2R., 3R. 880 : h., 2R., 3R. 745 Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, I.c., 1R. 729; 2R. 832 ; 3R. 915 : h., 2R. 557 ; Obs. (Mr. Deputy- Speaker), 601 ; 3R. 715 Parker, Constable, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 198 Parliamentary Session, 1902, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 1274 Patea Election, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 391; m. (Mr. Seddon), 510, 894 Patea Election Petition, h., Obs. (Mr. Deputy- Speaker), 346 Patea Harbour Bill, l.c., 1R. 729; 2R., 38. 877: h., 3. 714 Payment of Interest on $500,000 New Zealand Debentures invested by Public Trustee, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 449 Payment of Members Bill, I.c., 1R. 1151 ; 2R., 3R. 1169: h., 1R. 448; Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 510; 2R. 1104 ; Com. 1145; 3R. 1151 Payment of Road - labourers, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 155 Permanent Artillery Pay, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 194 Permanent Militia Uniforms, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 595 Personal Explanation, h., Obs. (Mr. Meredith), 950 Petition re Maori Degradation, h., Obs. (Mr. Pirani), 389 Point Halswell Gaol: Escaped Prisoners, h., q. (Mr. Hutcheson), 102 Poisoning of Poultry, h., q. (Mr. Field), 110 Police-stations, h., m. (Mr. Fisher), 187 Poolburn, Drunkenness at, h., q. (Mr. T. Mac- kenzie), 600 Precedence, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 319 Preservation of Scenery along Cheviot - Kai- koura Road, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 107 Primary Education Reserver, h., m. (Mr. Dun- can), 1208 Privilege, h., Obs. (Mr. Fisher), 1016 Proclamation of Maori Districts in Middle Island, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Taiaroa), 1 Produce Markets, h., q. (Mr. Field), 203 Products Export Bill, h., 1R. 187 ; Dis. 1085 Promissory Oaths Bill, I.c., 3R. 1 Property Law Bill, I.c., Dis. 1169; h., Dis. 389 Public Abattoirs, h., q. (Mr. Field), 202 Public Debt, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 147 Public Health Bill (No. 2), l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1169 : h., 1R. 389 ; Dis. 1095 ; m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 1160 Public Health Bill (No. 3), l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1199 : h., 1R. 1188; 2R., Com., 3R. 1196 Public school Teachers' Salaries Bill, l.c., 1R. 785 ; 2R. 838 ; 3R. 1075 : h., q. (Mr. Mere- dith), 587 ; 2R. 602 ; Com. 780; 3R. 781 Public Service : Particulars re Names, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 317 Public Trust Office Bill, I.c., 1B. 1169 ; 2R. 1172 : h .. 1R. 389 ; 2R. 573; Com., 3R. 1168 Public Works Act Amendment Bill, h., q. (Mr. Field), 165 Public Works Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R. 1199; Com., 3R. 1204 ; m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1205 : h., 1R., 2R. 1238; Com., 3R. 1239 ; m. (Mr. Seddon), 1251 Public Works Statement, h. 638 Pupuke Lake, h., q. (Mr. Monk). 598 R. Vol. 116. Rabbit Nuisance Bill, h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 255 Railway Casual Hands, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 590 ; q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 591 Railway-fares, h., q. (Mr. Pirani), 596 
<page>1348</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1388</url>
Hanan), 407 Railway Officers' Classification, h., q. (Major Steward), 386 ; q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 591 Railway Passenger-carriages imported, h., m. (Mr. Hogg), 182 Railway Passengers, h., q. (Mr. McLachlan), 189 Railway-rates in North and South Islande, h., q. (Mr. Symes), 244 Railway Rolling-stock, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 230 ; m. (Mr. Flatman), 230 ; m. (Mr. J. Allen), 230 Railway-siding between Ranfurly and Wedder- burn, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 36 Railway Service, Appointments to, h., q. (Mr. Laurenson), 386 Railway Service Wages, h., q. (Mr. T. Macken- zie), 592; q. (Mr. Guinness), 592 Railway-sleepers, h., q. (Mr. Hall), 197 Railway Spark-arrester h., q. (Mr. Massey), 246 Railway through Pahiatua Electorate, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 248 Railway Workshops, Employés in, h., q. (Mr. W. Russell), 591 Rangitaike River, Gorse on, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Ormond), 612 Rangitane and Ngatikuia Hapus, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 603 Rating on Unimproved Values Bill, h., 1R. 30; m. (Mr. Fowlds), 373 Rebates to Crown Tenants, h., q. (Mr. R. Thompson), 188 Reduction of the Weight of Sacks, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 35 Referendum Bill, l.c., 1R. 491 ; 2R. 669 : h., 1R. 30; 2R., 212 ; Adj. Deb. 266; Com. 363, 393;  m. (Mr. Pirani), 495 ; 3R. 507 Registration of Debentures, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 386 Registration of Land Transfers, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 248 Remuera Waterworks Construction Empower- ing Bill, h., 1R. 279 Reorganization of Geological Department, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 409 Represention Bill, h., 1R. 182 Resignations of Members, h., 5 Resignation of Hon. Mr. Oliver, l.c., 12 Returned Troopers, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 379 Returned Troopers' Certificates of Discharge, h , q. (Mr. Hall), 401 Rhodes Trust Bill, I.c., 1R. 326 ; 2B. 364 Rifles for Volunteers and Clubs, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 189 Rimutaka Railway, h., m. (Mr. Hornsby), 182 Rivers Commission Report, h., q. (Major Steward), 195 Rodney Electorate, h., q. (Mr. R. Thompson), 382 Rotorua Sanatorium, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 589 Roxburgh Estate, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 240 Vol. 117. Rabbit Nuisance Bill, h., Com. 173, 522 Rabbits and Rabbit-skins, h., m. (Mr. McNab), 82 Railway Charges, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 299 q. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 511 Railway Department Revenue, h., m. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 83 Railway Freight on Manure, h., (Mr. Field), 305 Railway-sleepers, h., q. (Mr. Guinness), 301 Railway Traffic on Sundays, h., q. (Mr. J. W. Thomson), 304 Railway.works, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 515 Rangiora Railway-station, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 90 Rating on Unimproved Value Bill (No. 2), h., 1R. 82 ; 2R. 222 ; Adj. Deb. 255, 315 Redcliff and Takitu Small Grazing-run, h., q. (Major Steward), 102 Referendum Bill, I.c., Adj. Deb. 1, 79, 139, 174 Removal of Licenses, h., q. (Mr. Atkinson), 27 Remuera Waterworks Empowering Bill, h., 2B. 147 Representation Bill, h., 2R. 107 Return re Large Estates, h., q. (Mr. Herrier). 485 Returned Contingents, Members of, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 89 Returned Troopers, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Feld- wick), 529 : h., q. (Mr. A. L. D. Fraser), 476 ; q. (Mr. Field), 483; q. (Mr. Meredith), 487 Returned Troopers' Fare from Sydney, h., q. (Mr. McLachlan), 88 Revaluation at Hokianga and Kaihu, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 310 Rhodes Trust Bill, I.c., 3R. 173: h., 1R. 175; 2R. 238 ; 3R. 595 Rifle Clubs, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 16; q. (Mr. Lethbridge), 251 Rifle-ranges, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 482 Rifle Team for Bisley Meeting, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 475 Rifles for Volunteer Officers, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 479 River. beds, h., q. (Major Steward), 101 Rivers Commission, h., q. (Mr. R. Mckenzie). 92 Roads and Railways Expenditure, h., m. (Mr. Palmer), 83 Rolling-stock for Waikato Line, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 512 Rotorua Town Council Validation and Exten- sion Bill, I.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 592 : h., 1R. 472 : 2R., 3R. 617 Royal Visit, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 238 Royal Visit : Rewards to Police Force, h., q. (Mr. MoLachlan), 93 Ruapekapeka Pa, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 309 ## Vol. 118. Rabbit Nuisance Bill, I.c., 1B. 640; h., 3R. 597 Railway Charges, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 628 Railway Classification, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 623; q. (Mr. Barolay), 626 ; q. (Mr. Hutcheson). 632; q. (Mr. Fisher), 632 Railway-crossings, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 631 Railway Operatives' Plebiscite, h., q. (Mr. Hogg). 629 Railway-siding, Otago Central Railway, h., g. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 631 
<page>1349</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1389</url>
Railways Statement, h., 564 Rate on Sulphuric Acid, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 632 Rates on Crown Leases by County Councils, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 614 Returned Troopers from South Africa, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 622 Rifle Clubs, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 634 Vol. 119. Rabbit Nuisance Bill, I.c., 2R. 93; m. (Hon. Mr. Feldwick), 270; 3R. 442 Rabbit-poisoning, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 326 Railway Classification and Superannuation, h., m. (Mr. Bollard), 54; q. (Mr. Lang), 162; q. (Mr. Barclay), 351 Railway Concessions to Maoris, h., q. (Mr. Kaibau), 198 Railway Dining-cars, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. T. Kelly), 785 Railway Expenditure, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 907 Railway Rates for Timber, h., q. (Mr. Mere- dith), 202 Railway Return, h., m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 1173 Railway Service Regulations, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 161 Railways Authorisation Bill, I.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1169 : h., 1R. 1104 ; 2R. 1164 ; 3R. 1168 Rangitoto Island, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 598 Rarotonga Justices, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 100 Rating on Unimproved Values Bill, h., Dis. 389 Rating on Unimproved Values Bill (No. 2), h., Dis. 389 Reciprocity with America, h., q. (Mr. T. Mac- kenzie), 897 Recreation and Forest Reserves, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 196 Registration of Births Extension Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1199 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 852 ; 1R. 852 ; 3R. 1173 Remuera Waterworks Empowering Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1199 ; h., 3R. 1173 Representation of New Zealand at the King's Coronation, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 901 Reserves and other Lands Sale, Disposal, and Enabling and Public Bodies Empowering Bill, l.c., 1R. 1199; 2R., 3R. 1205 : h., Obs. (Major Steward), 947; 1R. 1208; 2R., Com. 1224; 3R. 1228 Reserves Disposal and Exchange Bill, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 155 Reserves for Ngatikuia Tribe, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 115 Returned Troopers' Medical Examination, h., q. (Major Steward), 195 Returns, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 596 Returns of Drunkenness, h., g. (Mr. Ell), 324 Revenue of the Colony, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 283, 1104 Review of Reviews, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 746 Rifle Clubs, h., q. (Mr. Field), 192; q. (Mr. Monk), 318 Riverton-Howell's Point Road, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 155 Rotorua Medical Officer, h., m. (Mr. Horries), 146 Royal Review in Christchurch, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 900 Royal Visit Expenses Bill, l.c., 1R. 234; 2R. 310; 3B. 347 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 5; 1R. 18; 2R. 119; Com. 206 ; 3R. 206 S. Vol. 116. Sanatoria for Consumptives, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 197 Sanatorium for Mount Egmont, h., q. (Mr. Symes), 245 Sanatorium near Naseby, h., q. (Mr. T. Mac- kenzie), 35 San Francisco Mail-service, h., m. (Mr. Millar), 231 School Attendance Bill, l.c., 1R. 24 : h., 18. 230; 2R. 464 School-teachers' Classification, h., q. (Mr. Tanner), 598 Seatoun, Lower Road to, h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 240 Sessional Committees, l.c., 25, 174, 326; h., 31, 230 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, h., 1R. 30 Shipping and Seamen's Bill, h., 1R. 552 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 697 Shops and Offices Bill, l.c., 1R. 24 ; 2R. 103 Slaughtering Inspectors, h., q. (Mr. Collins), 405 Small-birds Nuisance Bill, h., q. (Major Steward), 194 South Africa, Food-stuffs for, h., m. (Mr. Monk), 230 South Africa, Oats for, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 230; m. (Mr. Meredith), 373 South African Charters, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 230 South Island Maoris, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 391 Southland Police District, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 604 Springburn Branch Line, h., q. (Mr. MoLachlan), 190 Springfield-Patterson's Creek Railway, h., q. (Mr. MoLachlan), 596 St. Andrew's Telegraph-office, h., q. (Major Steward), 245 Standard Certificates, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Jen- nings), 327 State Fire Insurance Bill, h., 1R. 182; Obs. (Mr. Willis), 197 State Note-issue, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 379 State Sanatorium for Consumptives, h., q. (Mr. Graham), 385 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 281 ; Com. 485 Statutes Compilation Bill, h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 477 Statutes Revision Bill, h., 18. 30 Stoats, Weasels, and Ferrets, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 418 Stratford-Kawakawa Railway, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 192 Supreme Court Judges, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 606 
<page>1350</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1390</url>
Surveyor-General, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 186 Surveyors' Chainmen, h., q. (Mr. Symes), 412 Swearing-in of Members, I.c., 4; h., 1 System of Payment to Co-operative Workmen, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 183 Vol. 117. Sale of Preventives Prohibition Bill, h., 1R. 283 Samson and Sons and Blackwood Brothers, Z.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Bolt), 524 Sanatorium for Consumptives, h., q. (Mr. Stevens), 306 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), h., 2R. 121 School-books, Uniform Set of, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 343 Second-hand Dealers Bill, h., 1R. 595 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, h., 2R. 105 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, h., Com. 360, 524, 593 Shops and Offices Bill, l.c., m. 365; Adj. Deb. 421 ; Com. 472, 531 Silverstream Public Road, h., q. (Mr. Field), 17 Single Railway Tickets, h., q. (Mr. Willis), 92 Sire Horses imported by Government, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Ormond), 492 Small-bird Nuisance, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 311 Societies for the Prevention of Cruelty to Women and Children, h., q. (Mr. Tanner), 486 South Africa, Oats for, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 342 Southbridge Branch Trains, h., q. (Mr. Rhodes), 300 Speaker, Mr., h., Obs. 191  Stamp Bill, h., 1R. 532 Standard IV. Examination, h., m. (Mr. Guin- ness), 296 State Coal-mines, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 250 State Gold mining and Issue of Sovereigns, h., (Mr. Field), 489 State-school Children Compulsory Drill Bill, l.c., 1R. 173 ; 2R. 290 : h., 3R. 144 Statutes Revision Committee, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 81 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 12 Stoats and Weasels in the North, h., q. (Mr. Monk), 345 Stoke Orphanage, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 250, 484 Stone crushing Machinery, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 96 Stud Bill, h., 1R. 638 Submarine-mining Boat, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 19 Subsidising Public Libraries, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 97; q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 518 Supply, Class I., Legislative, 462 Supreme Court Judges' Salaries, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 93 Supreme Court Returns, h., m. (Mr. Pirani), 82 Survey of Crown Lands, h., m. (Mr. Witheford) 82 "Sweating," h., q. (Mr. Arnold) 479 Vol. 118. Safe Accommodation for Public Documents, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 650; q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 651 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), h., Com. 616 Second-class Railway-carriages, h., q. (Mr. Hardy), 627 Serjeant-at-Arms, h., q. (Mr. J. Allen), 663 Settlement in Kawhia County, h., q. (Mr. Lang). 619 Shops and Offices Bill, l.c., Com. 203; 3B. 258 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, l.c., 1R. 640; 2R. 689 : h., m. (Mr. Barclay), 617 ; Com., 3R. 618 "Shorthand Reporters Aot, 1900," h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 611 Southland Volunteers, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 615 Speaker, Mr., h., Obs. (Mr. Deputy-Speaker), 223, 693 Stamp Bill, h., 1R. 597 Statutes Compilation Bill, I.c., 1R. 640; 2B. 689 : h., 3R. 597 Storage Accommodation for Magazine Rifles and Carbines, h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 610 Stud Animals imported from Britain, h., m. (Mr. Massey), 597 Subsidies for Promotion of Athletics, h., Q. (Mr. Barclay), 630 Supply- Class I. (Legislative), 525, 575 Class II. (Colonial Secretary), 582. 666, 695 m. 693 Vol. 119. Sale of Preventives Prohibition Bill, h., Dis. 1085 San Francisco Mail-service, h., q. (Mr. Withe- ford), 161 School Attendance Bill, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 145; Com. 145: 3R. 1.90 ; m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1169 : h., 2R. 279 ; 3R. 1168 School Attendance Bill (No. 2), h. Dis. 1035 Second-hand Dealers Bill, h., Die. 1085 Settlers' Fire Insurance Bill, h., Dis. 389 Sheep-dip, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 201 Shipping and Seamen Bill, h., 1R. 96; Dis. 187; 2R. 276 ; m. (Mr. Hall-Jones), 278 Shops and Offices Bill, l.c., Dis. 1169 Shops and Shop-assistants Bill, l.c., m. 95 : m. (Hon. Mr. Feldwick), 267; Com., 3R. 442 Sly-grog Selling, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Jennings), 701 Smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill, l.c., 3r .. 93 : h., 1R. 96 ; Dis. 389 South Africa and New Zealand, Steam Service between, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 329: 0. (Mr. Flatman), 593 South Africa, Trade with, h., q. (Mr. T. Mac- kenzie), 329 South African War, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 319 Southbrook Goods-shed, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 161 Special Settlements, h., m. (Mr. Hogg), 146 Springbank Estate, h., q. (Major Steward), 183 State Coal-mines, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 590; q. (Mr. Massey), 599 State Coal-mines Bill, I.c., 1R., 2R. 915 : 3R. 1075 ; m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1171 : h., 1R. 448; 2R. 680; Com. 908; 3R. 900; m. (Mr. Seddon), 1161, 1174 
<page>1351</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1391</url>
State Fire Insurance Bill, h., Dis. 389 State Nursery for Forest-trees, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 153 Statutes Compilation Bill, l.c., Com. 96 Statutes Revision Bill, h., 2R., Dis. 1159 Steam Service between New Zealand and South Africa, h., q. (Mr. T. Mackenzie), 329 Stipendiary Magistrates, Appointments as, h., q. (Mr. Morrison), 101 St. Leonard's, Post-office for, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 903 Stud Bill, h., Die. 1085 Stud Horse for South Canterbury, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 115 Stud Horse for Western District of Southland, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder), 155 Sumner Deaf-and-dumb Institution, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 163 Superannuation of Judges, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 199 Supplies for Royal Visit, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 195 Supply- Class II. (Colonial Secretary's) 18 Class III. (Colonial Treasurer's), 61 Class IV. (Justice Department), 73 Class V. (Post and Telegraph), 90 Class VI. (Customs and Marine), 245 Class VII. (Stamps and Deeds), 256 Class VIII. (Education Department), 257 Class IX. (Department of Labour), 396 Class X. (Mines Department), 397 Class XI. (Department of Agriculture), 405 Class XII. (Working Railways Department), 434 Class XIII. (Public and School Buildings and Domains), 437 Class XIV. (Defence Department), 413 Class XV. (Police Department), 438 Class XVI. (Lands and Survey), 439 Class XVII. Valuation Department), 441 Class XVIII. (Rates on Crown Lands), 441 Class XIX. (New Zealand State Forests Ac- count), 441 Class XX. (Land for Settlements Account), 442 Class XX. (Public Works, Departmental), 859 Class XXI. (Railways), 860 Class XXII. (Public Buildings), 865 Class XXIII. (Lighthouses, &c.), 867 Class XXIV. (Tourist and Health Resorts), 868 Class XXV. (Immigration), 868 Class XXVI. (Roads, Bridges, &c.), 868 Class XXVII. (Development of Goldfields), 869 Class XXVIII. (Native Lands Purchase), 869 Class XXIX. (Telegraph Extension), 869 Class XXX. (Rates on Native Lands), 869 Class XXXI. (Contingent Defence), 869 Class XXXII. (Lands Improvement), 870 Supplementary Estimates, 1244 Surplus Crown Lands, h., m. (Mr. Heke), 887 Survey Department Nominal Roll, h., m. (Mr. R. Thompson), 887 Vol. 116. "Tagus," Troopship, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 284, 363 Taranaki Dairy School, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 410 Tasman River, h., q. (Major Steward), 183 Templeton Domain Board Empowering Bill, h., 1R. 230 Terms of Judicial Appointments, h .; q. (Mr. Hornsby), 194 Through Rate for :Grain, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 189 Tobacco - smoking by Youths, l.c., q. (Hon. Colonel Pitt), 174 Tongahoe Road, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 414 Totalisator Abolition Bill, h., 1R. 182; 2R. 698 Training of Volunteers, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 400 Training-ships, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 577; h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 599 Trawling, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Jennings), 365 Treatment of Cadets at Christchurch, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 195 Truancy from Schools, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 389 Trustee Amendment Bill, h., 1R. 30 ; 2R. 360 Vol. 117. Tadmor Bridge, h., q. (Mr. R. MoKenzie), 99 Taiaroa's, H. K., Petition, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Taiaroa), 71 Tax on Stallions, h., q. (Mr. Field), 310 Teachers' Certificate Examinations, h., q. (Mr. Guinness), 307 Teachers' Salaries Commission, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 191 Teachers' Salaries, Proposed Scale of, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 97 ; m. (Mr. Seddon), 144 Telegraph Messengers, h., q. (Mr. G. J. Smith), 573 Templeton Domain Board Empowering Bill, h., 2R. 147 Terrace Gaol, Wellington, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 522 Timaru Harbour Board District and Harbour Board Bill, h., 1R. 342 Trading-stamp Abolition and Discount-stamps Issue Bill, h., 1R. 12 Training-ship for New Zealand Boys, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jennings), 71; Adj. Deb. 133 Vol. 118. Tadmor Valley Co-operative Works, h., q. (Mr. Graham), 632 Teachers' Payment for Technical Education, h., q. (Mr. Barolay), 633 Teachers' Salaries, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 652 Tree-planting along Railway-lines, h., q. (Mr. Colvin), 532 Trustee Bill, h., Com. 660; 3R. 661 Vol. 119. Tabeke Settlers, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jenkinson), 389 Taieri Maori Village, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 156 
<page>1352</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1392</url>
Taihape, Drunkenness at, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 599 Tamaki Block, h., q. (Mr. Hall), 323 Taumutu Native Commonage, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Taiaroa), 915 Teachers' and Civil Service Examinations, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 745 Temperance Wall-sheets, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 319 Templeton Domain Board Empowering Bill, l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R. 875; 3R. 876 : h., 3R. 745 Thompson, R., h., Rep. Sel. Com. 651 Timber Export Bill, I.c., 1R. 1199; 2R. 1201; 3R. 1202 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 1197; 1R. 1198 ; 2R. 1208; Com. 1218 ; 3R. 1219 Topographical Plans, h., q. (Mr. Field), 902 Torotoroa and Taurutu Lagoons, h., q. (Mr. Parata), 598 Totalisator Abolition Bill, h., Dis. 389 Totalisator Betting by Telegraph, h., q. (Mr. Ell), 903 Tour of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 1016, 1173 ; h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 1034, 1188 Trawling in Hauraki Gulf, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 150 Treatment of Stock Diseases, h., Q. (Mr. Buddo), 154 Trustee Bill, l.c., 2R. 3 ; 3R. 389; m. (Hon. Mr. Bolt), 832 : h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 573, 788, 859 Turakina Sanatorium, h., q. (Mr. Stevens), 108 U. Vol. 116. Uniform School-books, h., q. (Mr. Houston),  193 Unpresented Returns, h., q. (Mr. Fowlds), 240 Vol. 117. Unauthorised Expenditure, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 297 Unofficial Passengers on Government Steamers, h., q. (Mr. G. W. Russell), 576 Vol. 118. Unopposed Returns, h., Obs. (Mr. Seddon), 609 Vol. 119. Unclaimed Moneys Bill, h., 1R. 389 Unopposed Notices of Motion, h., q. (Nr. Fisher), 96 V. Vol. 116. Vaccination, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jennings), 665 Vaile's Railway Stage System, h., Obs. (Mr. Napier), 374 Vessels chartered by Government, h., m. (Mr. J. Allen), 182 Victoria College Site, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 577 Visit of Imperial Troops, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 374 Volunteer Uniforme, h., q. (Mr. Millar), 380 Volunteers' Ammunition, h., q. (Mr. Flatman), 377 Varnish Industry, h., q. (Mr. Witheford), 303 Veterinary Surgery, h., q. (Mr. Hogg), 103 Victoria College, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 593 Volunteer Regulations, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 19 Volunteers' Lost Rifles, h., q. (Mr. McNab), 250 Vol. 118. Vaccination, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Jennings), 330 Vol. 119. Vaile Stage Railway System, h., m. (Sir J. G. Ward), 788 Veterinary Surgeons, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 113 Victoria College, l.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Reeves), 1199 Victoria College Site Bill, l.c., 1R. 1199: 2B. 1204 ; 3R. 1205 : h., 1R. 788; 2R. 1183; Com. 1187, 1220, 1240; 3R. 1240 Volunteer Capitation, h., q. (Mr. Field), 203 W. Vol. 116. Waiau Ferry Service, h., q. (Mr. Gilfedder). 412 Waiau River Bridge, h., q. (Mr. Meredith), 390 Waikakahi-Pareora Roads and Bridges, h., q. (Major Steward), 606 Waimahaka-Tokonui Railway, h., q. (Mr. McNab),.33 Waimarino County Bill, h., 1R. 30 Waimate Courthouse, h., q. (Major Steward), 408 Waimatuku Railway Wants, h., q. (Mr. Gilfed- der), 384 Waipahi-Heriot Railway, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 590 Wairarapa Lake Reclamation, h., q. (Mr. Hornsby), 199 Wairarapa Land for Settlement, h., q. (Mr. Hornsby), 383 Wangamomons-Ohura Road, h., q. (Mr. Lang), 192 Weight of Grain-sacks, h., q. (Mr. Buddo), 592 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, h., IR. 400 Wellington Harbour Board Bill, h., 1R. 30; 22. 466 Wellington-Hutt Railway, h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 193 Wellington-New Plymouth Railway, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 404 Wesleyan Church Reserves Vesting Bill, h., 1R. 400 Westport Harbour Board Reserve Vesting Bill, h., 1R. 182 Willowbridge and Uxbridge Railway-stations, h., q. (Major Steward), 404 Woodville County Bill, h., 1R. 182 ; 2R. 467 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, h., q. (Mr. Barclay), 381 Workers' Right of Appeal Bill, h., 1R. 30; 2R. 250 Workmen's Homes, h., q. (Mr. Bollard), 417; q. (Mr. MoGuire), 606 Workmen's Homes at Khandallah or Crofton, h., q. (Mr. Wilford), 248 
<page>1353</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788261&seq=1393</url>
Vol. 117. Waihi Miners' Dispute, h., q. (Mr. Palmer), 12 Waihi Swamp, h., q. (Mr. Herries), 346 Waimate Health Officer, h., q. (Major Steward), 297 Waimate High School Cadet Corps, h., q. (Major Steward), 99 Waitaki Mounted Rifles, h., q. (Major Steward), 480 Waste Lands Boards, h., q. (Mr. Lawry), 312 Wellington City Abattoir, h., q. (Mr. Field), 313 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, h., 2R. 147; m. (Mr. Hutcheson), 244 Wellington Customhouse, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 101 Wellington Harbour Board, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 29 Wellington Harbour Board Act 1879 Amend- ment Bill, l.c., 1R. 173; 2R. 293 ; 3R. 500 : h., 3R. 31, 144 Wellington Health Officer, I.c., q. (Hon Mr. Jenkinson), 173 Wellington-Manawatu Railway, h., q. (Mr. Field), 22 Westland and Nelson Goldfields Administra- tion Bill, h., 1R. 532 Winter Railway-excursion Fares, h., q. (Mr. McGuire), 510 Woodville County Bill, I.c., 1R. 70; 2R. 237; 3R. 334 : h., 3R. 12; m. (Mr. O'Meara), 359 Woodville Refreshment . room, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 25, 478 Wool Classing and Grading, h., q. (Mr. Gil- fedder), 104 Wool-market, h., q. (Mr. Field), 303 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 15 ; q. (Mr. Hanan), 31 ; Q. (Mr. Fiatman), 508 Workmen's Homes, h., q. (Mr. Field), 313 ## Vol. 118. Waikato Landless Maoris, h., q. (Mr. Kaihau), 654 Waimate Hospital District Bill, h., 1R. 693 Waipawa Railway - siding, I.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Tomoana), 642 Waitaki River Anglers, h., 7. (Major Steward) 623 Wednesday Sittings, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 663 Wellington Gaols: Escaped Prisoners, h., m. (Mr. Hutcheson), 597 Wellington Harbour Board and Corporation Empowering Bill, h., 1R. 204 Wesleyan Church Reserve Vesting Bill (No. 2), h., 1R. 95 Widening of Narrow Streets, h., q. (Mr. Bol- lard), 651 Windsor-Livingstone Railway, h., q. (Major Steward) ,633 Woodville Post-office, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 624 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Act, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 610 ; q. (Mr. Lethbridge), 614 Workers' Weekly Railway Tickets, h., q. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 626 . JOHN MACKAY, Government Printer, Wellington .- 1901. Vol. 119. Ward, Eleanor, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 586 Warfare, Principles of, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 591 Waikakahi, h., q. (Major Steward), 109 Waikato-Onehunga River Trade, h., q. (Mr. Massey), 114 Waimate Cash Land-values, h., m. (Mr. McGuire), 147 Waimate Courthouse, h., q. (Major Steward), 195 Waimate High School Cadet Corps, h., q. (Major Steward), 594 Waimate Hospital District Bill, h., Rep. Sel. Com. 453 Waimate Hospital District Bill (No. 2), h., 1R. 509 Waitaki Mounted Rifles, h., q. (Major Steward), 195 Waitekauri Public Battery, h., q. (Mr. Palmer), 200 Watson Fine of £500, l.c., q. (Hon. Mr. Rigg), 729 Wellington City Recreation-ground Bill, h., m. 753 Wellington, Disfranchisement of, h., q. (Mr. Napier), 315 Wellington Gaols, h., q. (Mr. Fisher), 99 Wellington Government Offices rented, h., m. (Mr. E. G. Allen), 146 Wellington Graving-dock and other Works, h., q. (Mr. Hutcheson), 895 Wellington Land Board, h., q. (Mr. O'Meara), 104 Wellington Public Abattoirs, h., q. (Mr. Wil- ford), 105 Wesleyan Church Reserve Vesting Bill (No. 2), l.c., 1R. 729 ; 2R., 3R. 880 : h., 2R., 3R. 745 Westland and Nelson Coalfields Administration Bill, l.c., 1R., 2R., 3R. 1199 ; h., 2R., Com., 3R. 1196 Whakapuaka Block, I.c., m. (Hon. Mr. Taiaroa), 871 Whangarei-Kawakawa Railway, h., q. (Mr. Houston), 160 Wire Netting for Settlers, h., q. (Mr. Bennet), 104 Workers' Compensation for Accidents Bill, h., m. (Mr. Seddon), 842; 1R. 852 Workmen's Homes at Invercargill, h., q. (Mr. Hanan), 155 Wright, Police Sergeant, h., q. (Mr. Hutche- son), 101 Y. Vol. 116. Young Persons Protection Bill, l.c., 1R. 276; 2R. 459; Com. 491, 551; m. (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker), 583 ; 3R. 614 : h., 1R. 30, 616 Vol. 117. Young Persons Protection Bill, h., 2R. 398 Vol. 119. Young Persons Protection Bill, h., Dis. 389 
