LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Friday, 4th October, 1901. First Reading-Third Reading-Blackwater River Gold - dredging Company-Mortgages of Land Bill-Money-lenders Bill-Horses imported by the New Zealand Government. The Hon. the SPEAKER took the chair at half- past two o'clock. PRAYERS. FIRST READING. Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill. THIRD READING. School Attendance Bill. # BLACKWATER RIVER GOLD-DREDGING COMPANY. On motion of the Hon. Mr. REEVES, it was resolved, That the petition of the Black- water River Gold-dredging Company (Limited) be referred to the Government for consideration. MORTGAGES OF LAND BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER. - Sir, I beg to move that this Bill be committed. The Bill has been before us recently, and I think the Council is pretty well familiar with it. It was first sent to the Statutes Revision Committee, in order to do what the Hon. Mr. Bowen proposed-to take the evidence of the Registrar-General of Land. I do not want to take anything out of the Hon. Mr. Bowen's mouth, but still I think I am entitled to say the evidence of that officer was entirely in favour of the forms and schedules of this Bill. His view was that the schedule of implied covenants was a great deal more satisfactory than the schedule of implied covenants that now attaches to deeds under the Land Transfer Act, and that if he had any suggestion to make it would be in the direction of altering the Land Transfer Act so as to incorporate with it the schedule of implied covenants drafted in this Bill. That shows that the Bill is an improve- ment so far. The Committee sat more than once on the question, and it was referred to the Law Advisers to see whether it was possible to put into this Bill a clause dealing with land-transfer conditions ; and it has been reported that it would be exceedingly inconvenient, and, in fact, not a proper thing to do, to alter the Land Transfer Act under the guise of an Act bearing a different name. I undertook in the Committee to submit to the Government the proposal that the Land Transfer Act should be Mr. Seddon implied conditions into line with this Bill when it is passed. And, so far as that goes, I think, Sir, the Council ought to be satisfied. They have the highest technical authority on the question, which is to the effect that the im- plied conditions attached to this Bill are better and more satisfactory than the conditions at- tached to the Land Transfer Act, and the Go- vernment is, by expert authority, advised to alter the Land Transfer Act to that extent. Of course, it is my duty to submit that to my colleagues, and, if possible, to have the Land Transfer Act amended in that direction. Then, I must refer to the amendments on the Order Paper. The first amendment which the Hon. Mr. Bowen has given notice of was approved of in Committee. It is purely a matter of direc- tions as to the proper filling-up of a form. It was brought before the Committee that there are certain societies- co-operative societies and others-where interest is not charged. The first amendment simply applies to that. Where there is no interest this line can be struck out ; but still the societies will have the opportunity -and it will be of advantage to them-of making use of the schedule in this Bill. The second amendment is also one that, I believe, is quite right, and that is to bring the matter of default into line with the other law on the subject. Instead of it being one month it is to be two months. I beg to move, That the Council go into Committee on this Bill. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN. - The Hon. the Minister has explained what has been done with this Bill by the Statutes Revision Com- mittee. I think the Council will see that it was advisable that the evidence of the Regis- trar-General of Land should be taken on the matter. The Bill deals with a technical sub- ject, upon which it was right to take the opin- ion of a man who has the largest experience in the working of the Land Transfer Act. Mr. Davy did say, as the honourable gentleman has explained to the Council, that in his opinion this Bill would not interfere with the Land Transfer Act in any way, but that it was ad- visable as far as possible to bring this measure into conformity with that Act. The first amendment proposed is merely a formal one, to except certain societies which are subject to special legislation from the provisions of para- graph (h) of the First Schedule. The second one is practically to make the seventh implied covenant, recited in the Seventh Schedule, the same as the provision in the Land Transfer Act. That is, in short, the substance of the amend- ments proposed. The Hon. Mr. TWOMEY .- Mr. Speaker, with regard to this amendment on the Order Paper, giving power to alter the form, I have reason to believe it is dangerous, and the reason I say so is on account of the evidence that was given before the Mines Committee the other day. There are regulations in the Companies Act drawn up, but there is power given to vary and alter those regulations, and they were varied and altered in such an extraordinary way that it allowed persons who had no shares in the 
<page>217</page>
think it is very dangerous to allow any altera- tion to be made in the form. Bill committed. IN COMMITTEE. Second Schedule. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN moved the following amendment, To omit all the words after " Seventhly, that," in line 44 to the end of line 52, and to insert the following words in lieu thereof : " where the mortgagor makes default for the space of two months in payment of the principal sum and interest, or in the observance of any other covenant expressed or implied in the mortgage, and at least one month's notice in writing of his intention to do so has been given by the mortgagec to the mortgagor, or is left upon the said land or at the usual or last known place of abode in the colony of the mort- gagor, the mortgagee may sell the said land, or any part thereof, either altogether or in lots, by public auction or by private contract, or partly by either of such modes of sale, and sub- ject to such conditions as the mortgagee thinks fit, and may exercise such other incidental powers in that behalf as are conferred upon mortgagees by ' The Land Transfer Act, 1885,' or by . The Property Law Consolidation Act, 18-3,' as the case may be." The Hon. Mr. W. KELLY moved to strike cut the words "or by private contract, or partly by either of such modes of sale." The Committee divided on the question, " That the words be retained."  AYES, 21. Smith, A. L. Arkwright Louisson Bowen McLean Swanson Pinkerton Taiaroa Feldwick Tomoana Pitt Gourley Johnston Reeves Twomey Scotland Walker, L. Kelly, T. Walker, W. C. Shrimski Kenny NOES, 7. Jenkinson Kelly, W. Barnicoat Bolt Jones Rigg. Harris Majority for, 14. Words retained. Amendment as proposed by the Hon. Mr. BOWEN agreed to. Bill reported. MONEY-LENDERS BILL. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- This Bill to a certain extent travels over thorny ground, because just as in the last Bill we were discuss- ing how to try to mete out justice between mortgagee and mortgagor and all concerned, so perhaps this Bill may be looked upon as inter- fering with the liberty of the subject, and may possibly be interfering with certain honest people in getting their dues. But still modern sense as regards money-lending has very much altered of late, because modern life has shown that the more ignorant portions of the com- munity are the victims of usury and oppression other hand, I do not suppose that this com- munity in New Zealand is as badly oppressed by the money - lender as are communities in other parts of the world ; and probably no part of the world is worse oppressed in this par- ticular than the Old Country. So much is that the case that this has been a constant subject for agitation and for attempted reform, and it was in consequence of the necessity for reform that this has been a very live subject for the last few years. I think if the Council will only just consider what I desire to read from a report of the House of Commons it will show what the members of that body think on the subject, and how important a question it is felt to be. In the year 1898 a Committee was set up in the House of Commons to inquire as to the best means of dealing with the question of money-lending, and this is an extract from their report : - " After carefully considering the evidence which has been given in regard to particular transactions, and the general expressions of opinion of persons so well qualified to form a judgment as Sir Henry Hawkins, Sir James Charles Mathew, Sir George Lewis, the Inspec- tor-General in Bankruptcy, and the County Court Judges, your Committee have unhesitat- ingly come to the conclusion that the system of money-lending by professional money-lenders at high rates of interest is productive of crime, bankruptcy, unfair advantage over other credi- tors of the borrower, extortion from the bor- rower's family and friends, and other serious injuries to the community. And, although your Committee are satisfied that the system is sometimes honestly conducted, they are of opinion that only in rare cases is a person benefited by a loan obtained from a profes- sional money-lender, and that the evil attend- ant upon the system far outweighs the good. They therefore consider that there is urgent need for the interposition of the Legislature with a view to removing the evil." Well, I do not for one moment mean to say that our condition in this colony is anything like as bad as is the condition in the Old Coun- try. There is not here the same amount of dependence upon the pawnable nature of our personal property as there is there. I remem- ber a very suggestive remark from a well-known Ho traveller who was visiting these shores. was a very pleasant gentleman, a man who, like Ulysses, had known many places and many people, and I expressed my regret, when I met him in a country town in New Zealand, that he had landed on our shores in a time of depres- sion. Of course, it is needless to add, when I say it was a time of depression, it was not in the time of the present Government. It was a long time before that ; but, at all events, it was the policy of the Government in those days to speak of it as a time of depression, which we never do. And I apologized to him for not being able to support him from a public point of view as we should like to have done. He said, " Well, I do not know. I have travelled a good deal, and I see that all you fellows carry 
<page>218</page>
depression could not apply under your condi- tions." Well, of course, that is relative. Of course, my friend was talking of his London experience, and he would not think a popu- lation hard up as long as they had watches in their pockets that had not been "popped." But, as far as we are concerned, there does not seem to be the amount of every-day living from hand to mouth that there is in the Old Country. Still at the same time we ought to protect our people from the usury of the kind which goes on. No one can look at some of the trans- actions which are disclosed by the Mercantile Gazette without seeing that transactions are entered into every day without considera- tion of one kind on certainly the part of the borrower, and without consideration of the other kind on the part of the lender; because if the lender has any hope that what he was lending was going to benefit the bor- rower he would never consent to lend his money on such terms as would only bring the borrower into further trouble. Now, this Bill proposes, I think in a very reasonable way, to set the matter on a very satisfactory foot- ing. In the first place, the operative clauses are not very many. Clause 2 defines the word "money - lender " as including "every person (whether an individual, a firm, a society, or a corporate body) whose business is that of money-lending, or who advertises or announces himself or holds himself out in any way as carrying on that business ; but does not in-  clude -- (1) Any duly licensed pawnbroker," because they are dealt with under their own Act ; or building societies, also because they are under their own Act; or the friendly societies ; or "any person bona fide carrying on the business of banking or insurance or any business in the course of which and for the purposes whereof he lends money at a rate of interest not exceeding ten per centum per annum." Then clause 3 provides that- " Where proceedings are taken in any Court by a money-lender for the recovery of money lent after the passing of this Act, or the enforce- ment of any agreement or security made or taken after the passing of this Act in respect of money lent either before or after the passing of this Act, and it appears to the Court that the interest charged in respect of the sum actually lent is excessive, or that the amounts charged for expenses, inquiries, fines, bonus, premiums, renewals, or any other charges are excessive, or that, in either case, the transaction is harsh and unconscionable, or is otherwise such that a Court of equity would give relief, the Court may reopen the transaction and take an account between the money - lender and the person sued." And so on, to the end of the clause. The whole matter is a matter for a Court of equity to enter into, and to state what, in their opinion, is a fair amount of interest for the person bor- rowing to pay. And, then, clause 4 requires the money-lender to be registered. He has to register himself " under his own or usual trade name, and in no other name, and with the | that, there are subsections giving exceptions, Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker at which he carries on his business of money- lender ; and shall carry on the money-lending business in his registered name, and in no other name and under no other description, and at his registered address or addresses, and at no other address." I think that provision of the statute will be found to be perfectly reasonable. Of course, there are penal provisions by which, on summary conviction, the offender shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding $500, or, "in the case of a second or subsequent convic- tion, to imprisonment, with or without hard labour, for a term not exceeding three months, or to a penalty not exceeding one hundred pounds, or to both : provided that, if the offender is a body corporate, that body corporate shall be liable on a second or subsequent conviction to a penalty not exceeding five hundred pounds." I do not know why the directors should not be sub- ject also to imprisonment, but still we all know that some companies are very hard to get at in their personal capacity, if not their corporate. The rest of the Bill simply gives the machinery for the registering of money-lenders and giving effect to the Bill. I am quite sure that the Council will have every sympathy with a Bill of this kind, although, as I said before, the evils are not so apparent as they are in the Old Country. Still there is no reason why we should not in Committee take any suggestions that legislation in the Old Country may give us ; and perhaps if we look into our old archives and dip into our old recollections there are abuses even in this country as regards money- lending which fully justify us in endeavouring to legislate against them. The Hon. Mr. A. LEE SMITH .- Whilst I think it is a very desirable thing that all necessary steps that are possible should be taken to curtail in some cases the very extor- tionate interest that is charged by money- lenders, still I think at the same time all honourable gentlemen here will admit that it is a very difficult thing to carry through. We all know that in the past all the efforts that have been made for the putting-down of usury have been in the main absolutely futile, and I am very much disposed to think that our efforts will result very much in the same way. But, at any rate, I cannot congratulate the Government upon the Bill which they have produced for that object. In the first place, it is very crude ; it is contradictory ; it does those things which it ought not to do, and it does not do the things which it ought to do. Now, in the remarks which I am going to offer 1 shall endeavour to make it clear to the Council, and I think before I have done I shall be able to show to honourable members, that what I have said is not without justification. Now, Sir, the definition of "money-lender " is that it "includes every person (whether an in- dividual, a firm, a society, or a corporate body) whose business is that of money- lending, or who advertises or announces himself or holds himself out in any way as carrying on that business." Then, following 
<page>219</page>
and when we come to subsection (4) we find | have not seen that this clause is one that it exempts- " Any person bona fide carrying on the busi- ness of banking or insurance, or any business in the course of which and for the purposes whereof he lends money at a rate of interest not exceeding ten per centum per annum." It does not include these people. Very well ; now, it appears to me there is a limitation in that clause which there should not be. " Any person carrying on any business in the course of which and for the purposes whereof he lends money ": that is to say, by the rendering of this clause, any person who is not absolutely a money-lender, but a private person who lends money of his own in a legitimate way upon security, whatever it may be, would not come within the exemption of the word " money-lender," and therefore if honourable members will turn over the page they will sce by section 3 of the Bill, under which there are certain pains and penalties, that there is great risk of inflicting much hardship upon a great many innocent people. Then, under sub. section (4) of clause 2 it is provided that bankers and insurance people who lend money do not come under the Act if they lend at a rate of interest not exceeding 10 per cent. Now, I can conceive, and no doubt the business intelligence of a great many honourable gentlemen will enable them to conceive, many cases where a loan at 8 or 9 or 10 per cent. can be effected by these people which might be much more usurious or extortionate, and might result in much more injury or loss to the person borrow- ing than if 12 per cent. were charged in other cases. Let me give an instance. A person may be a speculative money-lender, and some one riay come to him wanting facilities for carrying out a risky undertaking. I cannot give the Council a better illustration than the applica- tion of my argument to the late boom in river- dredging for gold. Many honourable members will know that some companies have borrowed money to complete their dredges when they got partially through the building of them. Now, what is the security of a dredge? A man may say, " It cost me £7,000 ; lend me £5,000 on it." Well, it has been found by experience that a great many of these dredges sold after the claim has been found to be unprofitable have not brought as many hundred pounds as they cost thousands probably only six months before ; and therefore to limit these people to 10 per cent. upon a transaction which may only last from three to six months is not what is required to give support and encouragement to people to lend money upon many legitimate transactions which are in themselves specula- tive both from the borrower's and lender's point of view. Who would lend £4,000 upon a dredge which would be likely to last only six months unless he got a good bonus ? And by clause 4 it will be found there is a strict provision made for cancelling all these bonuses, and everything that may come into the net of the money- lender outside the actual rate of interest. I am surprised that the other place, including as it does many experienced business- men, which ought to have had revision for the inclusion of the people to whom I have referred. Then, there is no provision whatever in the Bill for an extensive class of business which is done, whereby enormous profits are made on financial transactions which are alto- gether ignored here. I allude to those people who carry on the very lucrative business of indorsing bills for others. I dare say honour- able gentlemen have often heard of the recently deceased Isaac Gordon, and also of that very well-known West End money-lender Sam Lewis. Those people, besides being direct money- lenders, were what are called indorsers of bills for a consideration, so that in some cases of a promissory note at six months, at a rate of 6 or 8 per cent. interest, the holder of the bill may have to get an indorsement to enable him to discount it. The indorser, who is often a friend of the lender, charges in this case as much as he can ; and he may even be an ally or a partner of the lender, but who, by the nature of this Bill, would not be included in its pains and penalties. That gentleman might ask 10 or 15 per cent. for three months only- at the rate of 40 or 60 per cent. per annum- for signing his name to the paper, and then divide the profit with the person who sent the borrower to him. This thing is altogether kept out of sight in the Bill, and I am surprised that members of the other House have not seen this very flagrant flaw. Now, in clause 3 there are eight subsections, and subsection (8) reads :- "For the purposes of this section (but for no other purpose) the expression ' money- lender ' includes any person who lends money for interest." This goes altogether outside the people who are included in the definition contained in clause 2. Now, what is the nature of clause 3? An Hon. MEMBER. - Does not "money- lender " include "indorser " ? The Hon. Mr. A. LEE SMITH .- No; an in- dorser does not lend money. He merely signs his name and gets his consideration. At any rate, I think not. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- The Court would include him, you would find. The Hon. Mr. A. LEE SMITH .- No. He does not lend the money. The Court would have nothing to do with the indorser. However, I have done with that. Now, clause 3 refers to reopening transactions, and, without going through it verbatim, I may say the effect of it is this: that the party who has borrowed the money can reopen the question as to the terms under which he borrowed that money, and get relief from the Court. But, then, subsection (2) of clause 3 is worse still. It reads as follows :- "(2.) The Court may, notwithstanding any statement or settlement of account or any agreement purporting to close previous deal- ings and create a new obligation, reopen any account already taken between the money- lender and the person sued, and relieve the per- son sued from payment of any sum in excess of the sum adjudged by the Court to be fairly due in respect of such principal, interest, and 
<page>220</page>
and all the circumstances, considers reason- able ; and, if any such excess has been paid or allowed in account by the debtor, may order the creditor to repay it ; and may set aside, either wholly or in part, or revise, or alter, any security given or agreement made in respect of money lent by the money-lender, and if the money-lender has parted with the security may order him to indemnify the borrower or other person sued." What may be the result of a clause like that ? There is no limit as to time. A man may in all good faith, when interest is high, close his transaction and transfer his loan, and there- after, at any convenient time, the borrower -probably through spite, or owing to some personal animus-may go to the Court and ask for a reopening of the case without any limitation whatever, when the settlement of the transaction has been concluded, when the lender may be out of business entirely, and may have lost control of the evidence which would be required when the case came on. Subsection (8) includes any person who lends money on interest for the purposes of this sec- tion, and I maintain that would apply to an ordinary loan upon a property at, say, 6 or 7 per cent. If, therefore, at some particular time when money was tight and difficult to get, a man lent money on a house or on some doubtful security at 7 per cent. for a long term, and if the interest came down a year or two afterwards and there was a plethora of money, it would be open to the borrower to go to the  Court and ask for a revision of the whole thing. Now, is that fair? Supposing, for instance, we put the boot on the other leg, and say that a man borrowed money when interest was low, and money went up to double the rate. The lender has no right, no power, to ask for a re- vision of the security. He cannot do that ; and I say if it is fair for one side to be able to do it, it is also fair for the other. I can see any amount of difficulties under this Act. It will result in an enormous amount of litigation, an enormous amount of uncertainty, and an enor- mous amount of loss. I ask the Council to give this Bill most serious consideration. I stated in opening my few remarks that to my mind you will never succeed : that there will always be ways by which people will get round this. You must depend upon the intelligence of the people, the education of the people, and their familiarity with commercial matters for their protection. It is to be hoped that they are getting more familiar with business methods and more intelligent than they were. In the old days they could not stop it, and I feel that you cannot stop it now. You may partially check usury, perhaps ; but as the Bill stands I am perfectly sure it has a number of flaws, and that, if carried without the alterations I have suggested being made in it, I am certain those flaws will render it an unworkable Bill-that it will cause a great amount of dissatisfaction, and that it will be discreditable to our legisla- tive reputation. The Hon. Mr. RIGG .- Sir, I think we are Hon. Mr. A. Lee Smith practical speech he has just delivered in respect to this Bill. I am very much inclined to be- lieve with him that the Bill will be utterly use- less. If any money-lender charges less than 10 per cent. he does not come within the pro- visions of the Bill at all, and therefore we may assume that most money-lenders will not charge more than 10 per cent., but will charge pre- miums or foregifts for granting the considera- tion, and make other charges that will amount to very much more in the long-run probably than is now paid for a small loan ; so that it is not likely that any cases where exorbitant interest is taken are ever likely to come before the Court for revision. Therefore, I do not think that the Bill will be of much use at all. Still, I intend to vote for the second reading, because I think that the Council should give some indication that it is prepared to take steps to prevent, as far as possible, exorbitant rates of interest being charged on loans. The Minister who introduced the Bill told us that this had become a live question during the last few years. Sir, it is a question that is thousands of years old. The taking of usury was denounced in the Mosaic Code, and no Jew was allowed to lend to another either money or goods for interest. At any rate, that was the interpretation put on it at a later stage ; but it can also be read that under no circumstances was one of the chosen people to lend money at usury. An Hon. MEMBER .- Not to themselves. The Hon. Mr. RIGG .- Well, if the honour- able gentleman will turn to Leviticus, chap- ter xxv., verses 35, 36, and 37, he will read, "Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase." Now, this taking of usury has been condemned by all the most eminent philosophers of an- cient times, both Greek and Roman. Aris- totle, Plato, Plutarch, Seneca, and Cato con- demned it in very strong terms. Cato compared the taking of usury by man to the crime of murder, and said that the lender was as great a danger to society as the murderer. These were very strong terms ; but still that was the feeling at the time when moral philo- sophy received its initiative. Under the Roman law-the Twelve Tables-interest was fixed at 1 per cent. Later on it was re- duced by the Tribunes to } per cent. But those laws-as, in fact, every law which has been made to restrict the rate of interest -- were set aside ; and in later years, when the privi- leged class got the upper hand, the taking of usury became more vicious than it had pre- viously been. It was condemned by the Catho- lic Church throughout the Middle Ages, and many of the Councils of the Church condemned in most unqualified terms, as a great vice, a great danger to the State, and an immoral proceeding, the taking of interest for the use of money. The Anglo-Saxon laws against usury were also very severe. Edward the Confessor outlawed usurers and confiscated their pro- perty ; and Edward the First took such strin- gent steps to put an end to what was considered 
<page>221</page>
banished another fifteen thousand in one year -in fact, the opposition of the Catholic and also the Reformed Church with regard to this matter was so strong that it was considered un-Christian to take interest for money lent ; and the consequence was that a liberal interpretation was put upon the Mosaic law to which I have referred, and the busi- ness fell principally into the hands of the Jews. It was held that, while a Jew might not take interest from another Jew, he was at liberty to get all he could from a stranger. Well, the fifteen thousand Jews were banished in one year, and no Jews were allowed to return to England until the time of Cromwell. That shows the view taken in England at that time in regard to the practice. It was left to Henry the Eighth to be the first to legalise usury in England, and he fixed the rate at 10 per cent. But his son, Edward the Sixth, a few years afterwards, repealed it : he did not believe in it ; but when Elizabeth, the virgin Queen, came to the throne, she revived the statute of her father. James the First reduced the rate of in- terest to 8 per cent., Cromwell to 6, and Anne to 5 : and since then usury has continued to exist and flourish. But the most interesting feature of the legislation of that time was that each statute had in it an expression to the effect that it was an un-Christian thing to take interest at all, although, as far as the statute was concerned, it simply limited the evil, it did not prevent it. Such is a glance at the history of usury; and it may be said  that wherever legislation of this kind has been attempted it has failed. It is compara- tively of recent years that the term usury became so distasteful to the people, owing to the history which I have mentioned, that political economists invented another term for it-they called it "interest," applying the term "usury " only to exorbitant rates of interest ; but I have never been able to find out where the line is drawn. Now, on small loans, money- lenders charge 40 per cent. per annum, and I would like to be informed by any honourable gentleman whether that is usury or whether it is in'erest ? I know of an instance of a young man who once borrowed money to go horse- racing, and, his investment not being satis- factory, he very soon found that his salary, which was £250 a year, could not enable him to pay interest on his debt, which had become compound interest, and had it not been that his father was in a position to go to his rescue, there is no doubt that he must have finally reached the Bankruptcy Court. Well, that is one instance which I know of personally, and I have no doubt there are very many others of a similar character where people fell into the hands of money-lenders, and by paying them an exorbitant rate of interest and compound interest got into such a position that it was impossible for them to pay their debt, and the consequences to them must have been very di-astrous. However, as I have said, I think the Bill will fail. Political economists have agreed upon the point that Bentham's theory attempt to strictly suppress usury will only increase the evil, and I believe that will be found to be the case if this Bill becomes law. Now, as I have said I do not think the Bill is likely to be of much use, I propose to suggest a means by which this matter may be dealt with in what I think will be a more effective manner. When the rate of interest-I use the word " interest " now because I am now deal- ing with modern times - when the rate of interest on the security of land was considered to be too great the Government did not attempt to regulate that by legislation. They esta- blished a money-lending department, and the result was that which we all know: the rate of interest fell at once, and has since then greatly depreciated. Very well ; at first the money was only lent upon the security of country land, and later on suburban land was included. Then, why not extend the prin- ciple to lending money on personal security, and also to lending money on goods and chattels ? That, I submit, is the proper way to deal with a question like this. We have State establishments which do lend out money, and which enter into competition in that line of business. Then, why not go a step further, and do as they do in France : establish pawnbroker's-shops-Mons de Piete? Now, I was very much surprised to find that pawn- brokers were exempted in the Bill that is now before the Council. Why, the ordinary 40 per cent. money-lender is a gentleman compared with the pawnbroker, when you judge them by the rates of interest they respectively charge. I have been looking at the statute dealing with pawnbrokers, and I find that the amount of interest that may be charged on loans for goods in pawn runs up to 80 per cent. Think of that. And who is it that has to pay this 80 per cent. ? The people in the very worst posi- tion - those who find themselves in diffi- culties in a time of depression -and the poor and honest worker has sometimes even to sacrifice his bedding to obtain the means to live-that is, food. And yet he is charged all the more, probably because his necessity is so great. It seems to me that that is entirely wrong. There is a provision in the Act that if the goods pawned are sold, and produce more than sufficient to pay the interest on the loan and the loan itself, the surplus has, on applica- tion, to be paid to the person who pawned the goods. Well, I wonder if anybody ever knew of a person that pawned anything who ever got such a surplus? If there is such a case I would like to know it. Now, I submit, if State pawn- broking establishments were set up throughout the colony, they would be conducted with more honesty in that respect, and many poor persons would receive not only better terms as regards interest, but even if their goods were ulti- mately sold they would honestly receive the balance, if any, as between loan with interest and the price for which the goods were sold. Sir, I am not in a position to amend a Bill like this to carry out the suggestion which I have made, because I recognise it puts the 
<page>222</page>
the suggestion in the hope that it is worthy of consideration, and I feel sure that if we should at any time establish money-lending establish- ments to lend money on personal security, and set up pawnbroking establishments, we should render very great service to the people of the colony, and especially to a class that deserve to be considered-that is, the working-men and women of the colony. When we speak of in- terest, royalties, rents, and all the tribute charges which are paid, we find they all fall back on the backs of the workers-that is the workers' burden-and they are the people who should receive from the State the greatest con- sideration. Debate adjourned. ## HORSES IMPORTED BY NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER desired, with the leave of the Council, to lay on the table a return of horses imported by the New Zealand Government. In doing so he wished to make one or two remarks, if he might be allowed. The Hon. Mr. Ormond-he was sorry the honourable gentleman was not in the Chamber -- was, he thought, very unfair in what he said some time ago in respect to the horses imported by the Government, because, as an old horse- breeder and an importer of horses, he must know it was very hard to please everybody. The honourable gentleman had, on various oc- casions, made the remark that the horses im-  ported and brought into the country were only worth shooting, and that sort of thing. But still he used the term, and of course he did so with due regard to the responsibility of his position. But he (Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker) did not think they were fair remarks for any man to make, even though he had the responsi- bility of an experienced horse-breeder on his shoulders. The honourable gentleman made an attack on the officer of the department that was sent Home to buy these horses, and en- deavoured to sheet home to the Government through him a serious responsibility and neglect of duty. Well, that was a very serious charge for any man to make. It is a very serious responsibility for an honourable gentle- man to charge that against a man who could not defend himself, and therefore he (Hon. Mr. Walker) thought it was only right that, in placing the return on the table, he should say a few words in explanation of the purchases that were made. Now, the officer who went Home was Mr. Gilruth, whom most of them knew, and the only thing he (the Hon. Mr. Walker) knew against him was that he was a veterinary surgeon by profession, and, perhaps, therefore not likely to know much about horses. How- ever, the Government were sending him Home, and they thought he was a very good officer to select for this purpose, and they had full con- fidence in him. They all knew that when he went Home he went Home just at a time when the remount question was in full cry. It was felt that the horses we wanted to bring here Hon. Mr. Rigg other countries-were horses called "remount horses." We sent some thousands of very good horses of our own breeding to South Africa. The stallions the Government instructed Mr. Gilruth to buy were not the class of horses the Hon. Mr. Ormond wanted. They told him to get remount stallion horses, which would beget weight-carrying, hard-doing, short-legged horses, and asked him to put himself imme- diately into communication with the remount authorities at Home, and he was told that the stallions that he would require to buy were well- bred horses, not more than 15.2 hands, with plenty of bone and substance, short in the legs, and so on. Well, he (Mr. Walker) had no doubt that would not meet the Hon. Mr. Ormond from a racing point of view, and Government was not intending to supply stallions of that kind. The horses that the Hon. Mr. Ormond saw were Malachi, Serapion, and Lupin. He (Mr. Walker) need not read Malachi's pedigree, but it had Hermit's blood in it. He was ex- hibited in a show in London, and was well in the running for a King's Premium, but was con- sidered on the small side. Then Serapion, a good, suitable horse, last year won some good races, carrying heavy weights. He won a steeplechase race, carrying 12 st. 10 1b .- a big weight for a horse 15-2 hands. He was bought for $300. Then, Lupin, Mr. Gilruth said, had strained a tendon, and he bought him lame, knowing that he would recover with proper treatment during the voyage, which he did. The original price of this horse was two thousand guineas, and he was bought for £225. Those were the horses the Hon. Mr. Ormond saw, and he (Mr. Walker) guaranteed they would all give a good account of them- selves. An Hon. MEMBER. - Good wear- and - tear horses. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER said, Yes ; and, in spite of what the Hon. Mr. Ormond said, he (Mr. Walker) would undertake to get just as emphatic an opinion against his. Then, the other horses were all like the last. There was a horse called Tyranny, which cost $200, and another called Singlestick the Second, a young horse, three years old, one of the best for our purpose, which cost $350. It was hard to get legislators to agree, but to get two gentle- men to agree about a horse was harder still. But he felt quite certain that results would show that the selections made by Mr. Gilruth would justify the action of the Government in sending him Home to purchase them. The object was not to get racehorses. We did not want to get racing stock, but good, well- bred, weight-carrying hacks, and he was in- formed that Mr. Gilruth had fulfilled his duty uncommonly well, and every one would be satis- fied except those who wanted to get racehorses. Of course, they could not be satisfied. He intended to lay the paper on the table, showing the prices these horses cost at Home. He wished to draw attention to the fact that, in quoting the prices paid for the horses at Home, 
<page>223</page>
of bringing the horses here-that is to say, the shipping and landing in New Zealand. He moved, That the paper do lie on the table. Motion agreed to. The Council adjourned at three minutes to five o'clock p.m. # HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Friday, 4th October, 1901. First Readings-Bills discharged-Loans to Local Bodies-Duty on Agricultural Implements- Maori Land-Police-stations-Monday Sittings- Springbank Estate -- Coolie Labour at Colonial Sugar Company's Fiji Mills-North Canterbury Volunteer Officers-Old-age Pensions Act-Legis- lative Council Appointments-Manawatu Rail- way-Borough Council Officers' Retiring-allow- ances-Mrs. James Mackay-Appointments to Legislative Council-Appointments to Legisla- tive Council-Federation Commission-Appoint- ments to Legislative Council-Ministerial In- terest in Meat Companies-Rifle Clubs-Lyttel- ton Forts-Appointments to Legislative Cour- cil-Appointments to Legislative Council-Hıku- rangi Volunteer Corps - Christchurch Drill- hall-Auckland Drill-shed - Auckland Rifle- range-Sir George Grey's Papers-New Zealand Troopers' Horses-Permanent Artillery Pay- Supplies for Royal Visit-Waitaki Mounted Rides-Returned Troopers' Medical Examina- tion-Waimate Courthouse-Commissioners of Education Reserves - Recreation and Forest Reserves-Oeo Native Land-Maori Hostelries- Hohaia Patuone-Railway Concessions to Maoris -Con-table Parker - District Courts - Super- annuation of Judges-Inspection of Coal-mines- Paeroa River-Aubrey's Case-Waitekauri Public Battery-Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill-  Sheep-dip-Education Board Reserves-Lime- Public Abattoirs - Boilermakers at Addington Workshops-Mrs. L. J. Nutt-Railway Rates for Timber-Produce Markets-Volunteer Capita- tion -Adjournment-Royal Visit Expenses Bill -Maori Relics Bill. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER took the chair at half- past two o'clock. # PRAYERS. FIRST READINGS. Land Bill, Products Export Bill, Cook and other Islands Government Bill (No. 2). BILLS DISCHARGED. Cook and other Islands Government Bill, Shipping and Seamen Bill, Cook Group and other Islands Laws Extension Bill, Law Amend- ment Bill. # LOANS TO LOCAL BODIES. On the motion of Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City), it was ordered, That there be laid before this House a return showing,-(1) The total sum raised since 1886 under the Loans to Local Bodies Act ; (2) the total amount advanced out of such sum to local bodies ; (3) the total amount expended on roads and other works out of such moneys ; (4) the total amount received from the local bodies as payment to the sinking fund under the Act ; (5) the total amount of sinking funds now in the hands of the Sinking Fund Commissioner ; (6) the amount of deben- fund ; (7) the total amount of interest paid by Government on such loans ; (8) the total amount of interest paid by the local bodies in payment of interest on loans ; and (9) the year when debentures were first issued against such sinking fund. DUTY ON AGRICULTURAL IMPLE- MENTS. On the motion of Mr. MASSEY (Franklin), it was ordered, That there be laid before this House a return showing separately the articles now on the free list which have been placed on the free list under the headings of " Agricul- tural Machinery " and " Agricultural Imple- ments," from the passing of the Customs and Excise Duties Act of last year up to the present date. # MAORI LAND. On the motion of Mr. KAIHAU (Western Maori) it was ordered, That there be laid before this House a return showing,-(1) The total area of land now owned by Maoris within the North Island of New Zealand, distinguishing therein papatupu lands and lands held under any de- scription of ascertained title ; (2) the total area of such Maori lands contained (a) within each separate Council district constituted under "The Maori Lands Administration Act, 1900," (b) within that portion of the North Island for which Council districts under the said Act have not as yet been constituted, (c) within the boundaries defined by "The Urewera District Native Reserve Act, 1896," and amending Acts, (d) within "The Thermal-Springs Districts Act, 1881," and amending Acts, and (e) within "The West Coast Settlement Reserves Act, 1892," and amending Acts; and (3) the total Crown valuation placed upon, and the total Maori population resident within, each of the above-mentioned districts respectively. The said return to be laid upon the table of this House before the debate is taken upon the second reading of the Maori Lands Administra- tion Act 1900 Amendment Bill. # POLICE-STATIONS. On the motion of Mr. FISHER (Wellington City), it was ordered, That there be laid before this House a return showing the num- ber of police-stations now open in the colony as compared with the number open in Major Gudgeon's and Colonel Hume's last year of administration as Commissioner of Police respectively ; also the number of officers, non- commissioned officers, detectives, and men now in the Police Force of the colony compared with the number of such officers, non-commissioned officers, detectives, acting-detectives, and men in the Police Force of the colony during the last year of the administration of Major Gudgeon and Colonel Hume as Commissioner of Police respectively. MONDAY SITTINGS. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) moved, That after Monday, the 7th October, on Mondays, for the remainder of the session, the House do sit at 
<page>224</page>
Government business only. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) said that, before the motion was carried, the House should get some indication as to what Bills the Government intended to proceed with. The usual rule was that the first "slaughter of the innocents " took place before this motion was carried. Would the Premier not indicate to the House what measures it was proposed to proceed with, and what measures it was in- tended to drop ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) was pleased to see the unanimity with which the motion had been received. It was the first indication he had had that members wished to get home before Christmas. He thought members would recog- nise that by not forcing things, but by taking them quietly, the effect had been most bene- ficial on his own health and on that of his colleagues. He had not felt in such good trim at that period of the session for many years, and on looking round the House he thought he might congratulate members also on being very fit. As to the Bills the Government intended to drop, he wished to say there were several- more particularly the Bill dealing with local government -- that should be got through this session, and it would be his endeavour to get that measure before the House as soon as pos- sible. There were two or three other Bills of a very important nature which should also be passed. Some of the others had been before the House for a considerable time; and as members had, no doubt, looked into them and  formed their opinions upon them, they should not occupy much time. The Order Paper was not quite so formidable as it looked. At that stage of the session in previous years, he had seen the Order Paper much more formidable. Mr. HERRIES .- You had your estimates through then. Mr. SEDDON said the estimates did not trouble the Government much. No time had been lost so far, and he thought that members, after fairly criticizing the estimates, would allow them to go through without much alteration. He did not think that members should be de- terred from dealing with the legislation neces- sary. When they dealt with the estimates night after night they had a disturbing influ- once, and he thought it would be better to have them once a week, so that members could then come fresh to them. He thought, under the circumstances, he ought not to obtrude the estimates more than once a week. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked when it was proposed to bring down the public works esti- mates. Mr. SEDDON said he wanted to get the other estimates out of the way. The public works estimates were advanced, and if he had the general estimates through he could bring them down next day. Motion agreed to. SPRINGBANK ESTATE. Major STEWARD (Waitaki) asked the Premier, What is the result of the recent visit Mr. Seddon missioners to the Springbank Estate, Otaio ; and whether steps will be taken to acquire this very suitable property under the Land for Settlements Act ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said that the Go- vernment had made full inquiries, and did not think that the estate should be purchased at the price asked. COOLIE LABOUR AT COLONIAL SUGAR COMPANY'S FIJI MILLS. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) asked the Minister of Labour, If his attention has been drawn to the report that the Colonial Sugar Company are importing Parsee fitters, turners, blacksmiths, and carpenters to take the place of Britishers at present employed in their sugar- mills at Fiji ; and, if the report is true, what steps will he take to prevent a continuance of such an undesirable practice ? Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Labour) said he had received a communication upon this sub- ject, but, whilst he regretted very much that in Fiji, which was so near to our colony, these Parsee artisans were likely to be introduced, at the same time this colony was not entitled to interfere. The matter was engaging the atten- tion now of the labour unions of the Common- wealth, and, Fiji being & Crown colony, he did not think the Imperial authorities who were intrusted with the control of affairs at Fiji would do anything which must cause friction between the Commonwealth, this colony, and Fiji. # NORTH CANTERBURY VOLUNTEER OFFICERS. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) asked the Minister of Defence, Why the North Canterbury Volun- teer officers have not obtained their commis- sions, considering that they passed their ex- aminations on the 5th December last ? Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the commissions of these officers were being prepared. Some of the officers were gazetted on the 2nd May, and large numbers of com- missions had been prepared and signed and were ready for issuing. OLD-AGE PENSIONS ACT. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) asked the Premier, Whether he will, in the Old-age Pensions Act Amendment Bill, amend clause 44 so that the local Deputy Registrar may, in lieu of the Stipendiary Magistrate, sign the warrant for payment of the pension to the person named therein for the benefit of the pensioner ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the amend- ments the Government proposed were in the direction of increasing the powers of the Deputy Registrars. # LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL APPOINT- MENTS. Mr. ARNOLD (Dunedin City) asked the Premier, If, in making further calls to the Legislative Council, he will consider the advisa- bility of appointing one or more representatives 
<page>225</page>
of the medical profession ? In the two branches of the Legislature we had almost all interests represented with the exception of medical men. An Hon. MEMBER .- There is Dr. Grace. Mr. ARNOLD .- Dr. Grace certainly was a member of the Upper House ; but, as members knew, he was a local doctor, and he was very seldom come-at-able. He had not been present this session, and he did not think last session either. There were many questions that came before the House that dealt with subjects upon which the knowledge of a medical man would be of great help to the members of both Houses. It was impossible, of course, to appoint medical men to the House of Representatives, but there was no reason why medical men should not be called to the Upper House ; and he was sure there were many in New Zealand who would give the time required during the session of Parliament. In some of the other colonies that had been done. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the honourable member had not been as candid as he ought to have been. He ought to have told him and the House which of the Dunedin doctors he wanted appointed. They had already in the Council Dr. Grace, who was Surgeon-General of the forces. His answer would be this: He thought that, relative to the population of New Zealand, the medical men were well represented in Par- hament. He might tell the House that the Government had come to the conclusion that what was wanted in the Council was the repre- sentation of the small-farmer class. If some  members would change their present occupation and go farming there would be a chance for them. # MANAWATU RAILWAY. Mr. FIELD (Otaki) asked the Premier, If there is any likelihood of the Government pur- chasing the Manawatu Railway, and whether there are any insurmountable difficulties in the way of the said railway being at an early date acquired by the colony ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the difficulties were not insurmountable at all. Whenever the company intimated to the Government that they had agreed to waive the £21,000 difference the Government would be prepared to consider the question. The Government had come to the conclusion that they had offered a very fair amount. It was equal to nearly 5 per cent. interest on coupons from the time the first investment took place up to the present time. It was a slightly less amount than the assets as valued and submitted by the company, and it was equal to $1 10s. per share upon 170,000 shares : and he thought, all round, the Govern- ment had been prepared to act fairly liberal. That was the view he took of the matter, and knowing the large number of these shares pur- chased at 16s. and £1, up to £1 5s. per share, it gave a very fair return to those who had in- rester in them. At the same time it should not, of course, be forgotten that the Govern- ment gave to the company the land, and they have partially completed works, and they were buying back from the company the land and VOL. CXIX .- 14. works and paying for that which the Govern- ment gave to the company for nothing. An Hon. MEMBER .- It is not a fair way of looking at the matter. Mr. SEDDON said the land was given, and the works were given. That must be borne in mind. Of course, it was now the property of the company. Again, and in addition to this, and which was weighing with the Government, was that they had to take the responsibility of £680,000 of debentures, and they had seven or eight years to run. The Government could not buy them, and would have to ray 5 per cent. interest for the term of their currency. And in accordance with the policy of the country they had to cut down the returns from the railways to 3 per cent. They would then be paying 2 per cent extra, equal to a loss of 2 per cent. on the £680,000 for seven years. It made a difference, as his colleague the Minister for Railways said, of over £50,000. At all events, the promoters of the railway and those who in- vested were, he thought, entitled to be treated fairly liberally, because they had done good work, for the railway had been an immense benefit to the colony as a whole. The Govern- ment had come to what they thought to be a fair conclusion, and it was now for the com- pany to consider whether they would agree to those terms. As previously stated he had been prepared to put a paragraph in the Financial Statement with reference to this matter, and to ask that the arrangement for purchase be sanctioned. But he had not been able to do that, because the local directors did not see their way to agree to what the Government were prepared to give. The directors had fixed the amount at £1 12s. 6d. per share ; whereas the Government did not see their way to go beyond £1 10s. 2s. 6d. per share upon 170,000, or about £21,250 - that was the difficulty in the way at the present time. It was for the directors to remove that difficulty ; and, if they did that, he would be prepared to give Par- liament-as by law he was entitled to do- the opportunity of deciding the question, even though by so doing he, later on, should be accused of increasing the indebtedness of the colony by another million of money ; but his shoulders were broad, and the Government were quite prepared to accept the position, be cause they knew there would be commensurate advantages. He thought that all and every railway in the colony ought to belong to the State. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said he would like, in the most courteous manner possible, to suggest that the honourable member for Otaki should not bring on this subject again. It only gave the Premier an opportunity of putting the company in a worse position every time. BOROUGH COUNCIL OFFICERS' RETIRING-ALLOWANCES. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) asked the Premier, Whether the Government will this session introduce legislation to enable Borough Councils to pay out of the rates any retiring- allowances to officers of such Councils ? Last 
<page>226</page>
church Borough Council - Messrs. Haskins and Murray. These two officers had spent a con- siderable portion of their lives in serving the City Council, and they were under the impres- sion that they were entitled to a retiring- allowance. At the time they retired the City Council passed a resolution to the effect that they were entitled to a retiring-allowance. But that allowance was not immediately paid. The advice of the Auditor-General was taken, and also the advice of Mr. T. F. Martin, the municipal solicitor of Wellington, and those authorities advised the Council that they could not legally make the payment. Section 171 of the Municipal Corporations Act would probably have effectually protected them from any con- sequences which might have resulted from illegally paying this sum so long as the pay- ment was made in good faith. But after the delay which took place, and after receiving the advice of the Auditor-General and the advice of Mr. Martin, municipal solicitor of Wellington, it was felt that the payment could not be made without some further legislation legalising the allowances ; and, as those officers, as he had said, had rendered good service to the Council for the better part of their lives, he thought it was un- fair that they should be cast adrift without a retiring-allowance. And their position was made all the harder by the fact that the Council had passed a resolution declaring they would be entitled to such retiring-allowance. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said he did not in- tend to bring down an amendment of the  Municipal Corporations Act this session. was a matter as to whether the local authorities should give their officers retiring-allowance or otherwise. That was a question, he thought, which should be settled by the ratepayers them- selves. If the law was to be altered, there ought to be some indication in favour of the alteration on the part of those most interested -- namely, the ratepayers in the boroughs. He had not had any representations made to him. There might be, of course, cases where good and faithful service had been performed by the clerks of local bodies, and he thought that perhaps the better plan would be to pay suffi- cient salary to the officers so as to enable them to provide for their old age. He thought that that was a way out of the difficulty. However, he should be very chary in giving local bodies unlimited power to give retiring-allowances, knowing, as he did-for he had been for many years a member of local bodies-that it only required three or four members of the local body to put their heads together and they might give their Town Clerk a very liberal retiring-allowance. At all events, he did not in- tend to bring in any legislation of that nature this session. Mr. COLLINS said he agreed in the main with what the Premier had said, but these two men had been working for the greater part of their life on the assumption that they were to get a retiring-allowance, and the City Council could not now go back and pay the higher salaries suggested in lieu of retiring-allowances. Mr. Collins ing that they would be paid a retiring-allowance, and there was no doubt they suffered under a grievance. Mr. SEDDON said that the remedy was to petition the House to have a special Bill passed dealing with these particular cases. # MRS. JAMES MACKAY. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) asked the Premier, If he will, on the supplementary estimates for this year, continue to afford the same pecuniary aid to Mrs. James Mackay as was made last session ? His reason for putting this question was that last session the Government placed a sum on the supplementary estimates for Mrs. Mackay, wife of the late Mr. James Mackay, who, to his knowledge, had rendered very superior and special services to the colony. She was in such circumstances as would make a donation from the country very acceptable indeed. Mr. SEDDON said that last year the House voted £100, and now he supposed they were asked to give another hundred. He admitted that Mr. Mackay was one of the old interpre- ters, and one of those connected with the past history of the colony, and who had done good service. It was just a case whether those services warranted them giving a pension, for that was what was aimed at. The matter would be reconsidered by the Government, but they were not prepared to recommend a pension ; in fact, one could not be granted. # APPOINTMENTS TO LEGISLATIVE It COUNCIL. Mr. LANG (Waikato) asked the Premier, Whether, when making recommendations to His Excellency the Governor with reference to appointments to the Legislative Council, he will take into consideration the claims of the im- portant district of Waikato, which, since the re- signation of the Hon. J. B. Whyte, has not been represented in the Legislative Council? He would like to draw the attention of the Premier to the fact that at the commencement of the session there were forty-six members of the Upper House, and of those members twenty- eight represented the South Island and only eighteen the North Island. The North Island, therefore, had a claim for additional representa- tives in the other Chamber. And the Auckland Province had a particular claim ; and it would be interesting to show the number of people represented by each member of the Legislative Council from Auckland as compared with those representing provinces in the South Island. From Auckland Province there were seven representatives in the Upper House, and each one represented 25,134 people; Canterbury had nine members, each representing 15,893 people; Otago had twelve members, each re- presenting 14,428; Nelson had two, each repre- senting 12,638 ; and Westland had two, each representing 7,253. In other words, each Auck- land Legislative Councillor represented three and a half times as many people as the West- land representatives. He thought the Auckland 
<page>227</page>
and when new members were .appointed he hoped that justice would be done to that province, and particularly to the Waikato por- tion of it. He was glad to hear the remarks the Premier had just made with reference to the necessity of the farming community being letter represented in the Upper House, but, as the member for the Bay of Plenty had a ques- tion on this day's Order Paper dealing with that question, he would not enlarge upon it at the present time. Mr. SEDDON said he was very pleased that the honourable member was bringing this matter before him, and his diffidence was most com- mendable. Coming events cast their shadows before, and the honourable member seemed to b .. paving the way and trying to convince Ministers that he was just the sort of man to call to the Legislative Council after the next general election. # APPOINTMENTS TO LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Mr. HEKE (Northern Maori) asked the Government, If, in considering the names of persons to be appointed to the Legislative Council, they will take into earnest considera- tion the claim on the colony of the late Tamati Waaka Nene and appoint one of the late chief's grand-nephews to a seat in the said Council ? During late years appointments of Native repre- tentatives to the Legislative Council had been limited, so far as the North Island was con- cerned, to the East and West Coasts. The late   Major Ropata represented the East Coast ; he succeeded by appointment to the late Mokena Kohere, of the East Coast ; and he thought it was about time, if the Government intended electing any more members to the Legislative Council, that the Northern Maori District should have some consideration, and descendants of the late Tamati Waaka Nene particularly, he thought, should be the proper parties from whom the selection should be made. There were very good members of this family, and it would be a very good thing on the part of the Government if they could see their way clear to appoint one of those men to the Legislative Council. Mr. SEDDON regretted that the honourable member had placed this relationship to this late chief as a claim for consideration, because, in respect to our Legislative Council, they could not recognise hereditary rights either European or Maori. Even in this case indicated the relationship was rather remote -- they were not even grandsons, but grand-nephews. What the Government did recognise was this : that there ought to be further representation of the Native race in the Legislative Council ; and in con- sidering this, and in making any recommenda- tions, they would certainly bear in mind that the representation ought to be distributed widely, so that there should be representation of the different parts of the colony, and that those called were worthy of the race, and would make worthy representatives if brought into the Council. Mr. HEKE said it was not his intention to fluencing the Government. It was simply that there was a moral claim on the part of these people. # FEDERATION COMMISSION. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) asked the Premier, Whether he will name a date for the discussion of the report of the Federation Com- mission ? He had said nearly all he wished to say on the question of the appointment of the Federation Commission, and the £3,800 which it cost, when discussing the subject in Com- mittee of Supply. The investigations of the Commission, and the mountain of evidence which had been piled up, had created a feel- ing of ridicule in the public mind, ridicule ex- tending even to the belief that the average member of Parliament was the most gullible gobemouche in creation. It was not a matter of much concern to him what the honourable gentleman's opinion might be of Parliament, individually or collectively, but he objected to people in other countries regarding the mem- bers of the Parliament of New Zealand as a pack of fools. After the statement made by the honourable gentleman to-day in regard to the remaining business of the session, it was absurd to hold out any hope that there would be time to discuss the report in such a manner as would do justice, not to the report, but to the subject. He said it was unreasonable to suppose that there would be time for the dis- cussion of the report of the Federation Com- mission. He wished to ask whether the subject was to be discussed, or whether the report and evidence were to be buried-as he thought they should be-many fathoms deep. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said, At the beginning of the session he had promised an opportunity to discuss the report and evidence, and he was prepared later on to name a date. # APPOINTMENTS TO LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) asked the Premier, Whether, when recommending to His Excellency the names of those to fill the vacan- cies in the Legislative Council, he will take into consideration the fact that the farming community is greatly under-represented in the Council ? The Premier had practically answered this question by saying that he would see that the small farmers were represented. There were a great number of squatter representa- tives in the Council, and it was time the small farmers were represented. He trusted the honourable gentleman would not indulge in the cheap joke of offering a position in the Council to himself, or intimating that he desired it in any way, because he hoped to keep his seat in the Lower House until he could see the right honourable gentleman hurled from the Govern- ment benches. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said it looked as though the honourable gentleman thought he (the Premier) would be there for some little time yet on those benches. It did seem to him, when one found on one Order Paper four ques- 
<page>228</page>
honourable members wanted to get a pledge from the Government that they would have an opportunity of being appointed later on. This was an innovation, and in all his parliamentary experience he never remembered seeing on the Order Paper questions of this kind. It should not be encouraged. All sections of the com- munity had a right to have their claims taken into consideration, and have representation in another branch of the Legislature. One of the most material matters to be taken into con- sideration was the question of age, experience, and fitness. # MINISTERIAL INTEREST IN MEAT COMPANIES. Mr. FIELD (Otaki) asked the Government, Whether they are aware that persistent and uncontradicted statements are being made in various newspapers of this colony to the effect that private interests of various members of the Ministry are operating to prevent any attempt by the Government to make any change in the condition of the meat-market of the colony ; whether they are aware that such statements are gaining credence among the meat-producers of the colony ; and whether the Government will make a statement to the House on the subject ? He had no desire, of course, to pry into the private affairs of any Minister, nor did he insinuate that he thought for a moment any member of the Ministry would allow his pri- vate interests to stand in the way of the general good of the producers of the colony. But there had been a strong feeling for some time past throughout the country districts that the Go- vernment was not taking that interest in the meat-market question that the colony had a right to expect, and he confessed he shared that feeling. That being so, one could not be sur- prised that there was a growing feeling that there was some truth in the reports seen reiterated in the Press, that the private affairs of Minis- ters were standing in the way of their doing the good they might be expected to do. He thought the Ministry would be glad of this opportunity to make the position clear, and dispose of the rumours he had referred to once and for all. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the question was a most extraordinary one, and bore its own contradiction on its face. In the first place, he had not noticed the statements, and if such statements had been made they were absolutely unwarranted and unfounded. Not a single member of his Administration had any interest in any of the meat companies -not a single one. On the contrary, when they had been asked to obtain the fullest information they had done so, and would continue to do so; and they would go further. Their policy was to break down mono- poly. If such statements had been made, he wished to give them the most unqualified denial. # RIFLE CLUBS. Mr. FIELD (Otaki) asked the Minister of Defence, When it is proposed to supply Go- vernment rifle clubs with up-to-date rifles ? Mr Seddon Martini-Enfield rifles now supplied to rifle clubs were up to date in every way, except that they were not magazine rifles. They were the same bore and the same barrel as the magazine arms. Mr. MONK asked what was being charged for the rifles. Mr. SEDDON said, Cost price, and two years to pay it in. # LYTTELTON FORTS. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) asked the Minister of Defence,-(1) Whether recommen- dations have been made to the Government as to the advisability of altering the position of the guns on the south side of Lyttelton Har- bour ; and (2) whether, if these recommenda- tions have been made, the Government intends to act on them, and, if so, when ? Mr. SEDDON (Defence Minister) said recom- mendations had been made as to mounting on the north side of Lyttelton Harbour the guns now in Fort Ripa. The Commandant asked on the 2nd July, 1900, whether any action was to be taken, and Cabinet ordered details of ex- penditure to be submitted. Details of expendi- ture were submitted by the Commandant, esti- mated at $25,000, and on the 6th July, 1901, Cabinet decided that no action was to be taken. Each must take its turn. The Government certainly could not see their way at present to set apart #80,000 or £100,000 for this special purpose. # APPOINTMENTS TO LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Mr. G. J. SMITH (Christchurch City) asked the Premier, Whether, when recommending to His Excellency the names of those to fill the vacancies in the Legislative Council, he will take into consideration the fact that the manu- facturing community is greatly under-repre- sented in the Council? He asked this question in consequence of the questions which had been put by the member for the Bay of Plenty and the member for Dunedin City (Mr. Arnold). These honourable gentlemen were looking after the welfare of the medical and the farming interests, and the manufacturing community should not be lost sight of. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the reply he had given to the other questions would also apply to this one, and he might state that what he had said in regard to the other questions had already had a beneficial effect. In making future appointments the Government would bear in mind the various industries of the colony and the fitness of persons for the position. Mr. PIRANI. - It will be the first time. Mr. SEDDON .- That question might be raised if ever it was urged that the honourable member for Palmerston should be called to the Council. # APPOINTMENTS TO LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Mr. McNAB (Mataura) asked the Premier, Whether he will, in making appointments to the Legislative Council, remember the claims 
<page>229</page>
of Southland to additional representation ? There were at present nine members in the Council from Otago and one from South- land, and, the relative importance of South- land to Otago being the other way about, members would see to what extent the dis- trict he represented had been neglected in the past. He did not suggest that the Pre- mier should make any appointments until after the next general election, but if any appoint- ments were made he hoped Southland would receive consideration. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said that, in his opinion, there were two parts of the colony that were not sufficiently represented in the Legis- lative Council-Southland and Westland. At any rate, taking the former representation in the Council into consideration, there could be no doubt the claims of the district demanded consideration. In the making of appointments it was his opinion that neither occupation nor locality should be the guiding rule. Merit alone should be considered, and men should be put into the Council who would render efficient ser- vice to the colony-men whose standing in the colony and whose services to the colony would commend consideration. He believed there were in Southland men who would come fully up to that standard. HIKURANGI VOLUNTEER CORPS. Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) asked the Minister of Defence, Whether the services of the proposed Hikurangi Volunteer corps will be accepted ? The honourable gentleman was, no  doubt, aware that an application had been made by a number of young men in the Hikurangi district to form a Volunteer corps. It was a mining district, and in it there were a number   of strong, active young fellows who were anxious to form a company. If the Minister only gave them the opportunity he would find that one of the best Volunteer corps in the colony would be raised in that district. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the papers in connection with this application were forwarded to the officer commanding the dis- trict. Auckland, for inquiries and report, and he telegraphed yesterday that he was returning the papers with his remarks indorsed thereon. li the remarks were favourable the corps would de enrolled. CHRISTCHURCH DRILL-HALL. Mr. G. J. SMITH (Christchurch City) asked the Minister of Defence, Whether he will place a sum on the supplementary estimates for the rebuilding of the drill - hall at Christchurch, seeing that the Commandant of the Forces has reported that the present hall is " in almost a dangerous state "? The words quoted were the words of the Commandant himself. The Pre- mier, as Minister of Defence, must know that there was a very large and efficient battalion in Christchurch. The drill-hall was really too small for the requirements of the district, and when the Minister considered that fact, in addi- tion to his own officer's report that the hall was dangerous, he would see that it was quite time something was done. There was a large number of Volunteers in the district, and, as it cost them something to keep the movement going, the least the Government could do for them in return was to provide them with a proper drill-hall. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the rule in the past had been-and the same rule would be observed in the future that there ought to be local contribution. The vote he had taken on the estimates had been at the rate of £1 for $1. An Hon. MEMBER .- Do you pay that to all? Mr. SEDDON .- Yes. An Hon. MEMBER .- What about Auckland ? Mr. SEDDON said Auckland was differently situated. Auckland had a drill-shed, which was burnt down, and practically the Govern- ment were then the insurers. Subject to an amount being raised in Christchurch, the Go- vernment would provide for this drill-hall on the public works estimates. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL. - Who is expected to provide the local contribution ? Mr. SEDDON said there were people and Volunteer corps in Christchurch that were as well able to provide a contribution as corps in other districts of the colony that were not so wealthy as Christchurch. These other districts provided at the rate of £1 for #1. Southland and the North of Auckland were doing it, and he did not see he could do anything more than adhere to the rule that there must be a local contribution. Mr. G. J. SMITH said he would like to give the Premier some further information on the matter. It was a matter of renewing a drill- hall to accommodate ten or twelve companies, and it was no light task to undertake. The estimated cost of a new hall was £3,000, and if the Government would find £2,000 of that amount the companies would find the other £1,000. Mr. SEDDON .- If I get such a proposal I shall give the matter full consideration. # AUCKLAND DRILL-SHED. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) asked the Minister of Defence, What progress is being made in regard to the proposed re-erection of a drill-shed at Auckland ? Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said that plans and specifications had been prepared, and the work would be put in hand as soon as they were ready. AUCKLAND RIFLE-RANGE. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) asked the Minister of Defence, If the Government have taken the necessary steps to secure a permanent site for a rifle-range at Auckland ? Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the Government had secured a rifle - range for Auckland. A considerable piece of land had been leased for twenty years, with the right of renewal. The rent was about $150 a year, which was £100 a year less than they had been paying for years past for the privilege of using 
<page>230</page>
the old range. He was glad to be able to announce to the House that this arrangement had been made. SIR GEORGE GREY'S PAPERS. Mr. HEKE (Northern Maori) asked the Government, If they will arrange with the Government of Cape Colony for all the papers now in the possession of the public library of the said colony, deposited there by the late Sir George Grey, K.C.B., P.C., pertaining to per- sons and questions in this colony, to be re- moved from there to the Auckland Public Library? During the last year Sir George Grey was in the House he used to meet him frequently in his room in the Parliamentary Buildings, and Sir George Grey told him on two or three occasions that it would be a great pity if the Government did not acquire or obtain a lot of his papers which he placed in the library at Cape Colony. He was further reminded to ask the question when perusing a lot of the deceased statesman's papers in the library here, and he trusted the Government would be able to acquire these papers for the Auckland Library or the Parliamentary Library. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) was pleased the honourable gentleman had drawn his attention to this matter. Inquiries would be made, and he would see what could be done in the direc- tion desired. NEW ZEALAND TROOPERS' HORSES. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked the Premier, Whether it is a fact that the New Zealand Government have been credited by the Imperial Government with #28 or other price per head for all horses used by New Zealand troopers in South Africa which were fit for further service and handed over to Imperial officers when our men returned to the colony ; and, if so, whether, in justice to the men concerned, he will pay to each trooper who found his own horse the price received for the animal ? This matter was very fully dealt with the other night on the Imprest Supply Bill, and consequently it was scarcely necessary to ask the question now. However, he might as well give the Defence Minister an opportunity of answering it ; and at the same time he wanted to make it clear that his ques- tion applied only to those men who found their own horses. He was assured by quite a number of men that they were informed by the com- manding officer that when they handed over their horses to the Imperial authorities as remounts they would be paid for by the Im- perial Government, and they had accordingly been disappointed by what had taken place. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the answer to the first part of the question was that no sum had been credited for the purpose. His latest communications upon the subject were entirely in the opposite direction. Some officers had made applications for their horses, and the Imperial authorities sent them on to the New Zealand Government, and had pointed out that they understood that the horses, offi- cers, and men were sent by the committees of Mr. Seddon the colony ; and his reply had been in each case that, unless in the case of those who took out- side horses, which were not considered to belong . by agreement to the colony, or horses acquired privately in South Africa, the Government did not see their way clear to make any representa- tion. If officers took their own horses, and had not agreed to or ceded them to the Go- vernment, that was another matter. PERMANENT ARTILLERY PAY. Mr. E. G. ALLEN (Waikouaiti) asked the Minister of Defence, If he will take into con- sideration the scale of pay of men in the No. 2 corps, with a view of providing that married men shall receive an extra 1s. per day as house- allowance ; also that artificers in No. 2 corps be paid the same rate as artificers belonging to No. 1 company are receiving? His object in asking the question was simply to draw the at- tention of the Minister to the low rates of pay No. 2 Service Company received, especially the married men, who had to provide house-rent. Single men usually were accommodated in the barracks, and that lessened the cost of their living considerably. There were not a large number of married men in this company, and the extra cost to the department would not be great. The second part of the question referred to artificers. He understood, since he put the question on the Order Paper, that the mechanics in No. 2 company were not called artificers ; but, at any rate, they had a mechani- cal knowledge, and had to look after the engines and electrical appliances, and it seemed they got 1s. a day less than the artificers in No. 1 com- pany. He would like to know if the Minister could see his way to grant the request. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said the number of married men who would be affected in No. 2 company, if they got an extra Is. per day as house-allowance, would be thirty. The scale of pay for No. 2 company was practically the same as for No. 1 company, except that the highest class of men in ranks of No. 2 get is., instead of 6s. 6d. in No. 1. The Commandant stated that the artificers in No. 1 company were specially skilled tradesmen holding the rank of acting-bombardier. The tradesmen in No. 2 company, he understood, were embraced in non - commissioned ranks, except those who were embraced in the 7s .- a-day rate, and were not specially skilled tradesmen. He would look into this matter, and if he found that no reasons could be given to him for making these artificers acting-bombardiers, which carried the increased pay, he would either have to disrate them or promote those who were doing similar work in No. 2 company to be acting-bombardiers. In regard to the 1s. a day for married men, if he gave it to No. 2 company he should have to give it to No. 1 as well, and he expected that would mean sixty men, or £3 per day. Now, they had extended the privileges of the married men, and they only did the same work as single men, and the colony should not, therefore, in his opinion, pay a man simply because he got married. That was his business, and not the business of the colony. 
<page>231</page>
SUPPLIES FOR ROYAL VISIT. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) asked the Premier, If the statement appearing in one of the Dunedin newspapers on the 13th instant, that " none of the accounts due to local trades- men for supplies, &c., have yet been paid," such supplies, &c., being in connection with the Royal visit, and more particularly the veterans' luncheon, is correct? He felt it his duty to put the question, because the state- ments referred to had been published in a Dun- edin newspaper of the 13th September last. He quoted from the paragraph when discussing the estimates, and he would be very glad in- deed to learn that there was some mistake about it, and that the statement was not well- founded. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the honourable member would recollect that it was only last week the House passed the amounts, and he might say that, in anticipation, all the vouchers were sent out, and instructions in some instances \- to pay the accounts, and he believed several had been paid. At all events, it was his desire to deal with the complaint as soon as possible, although he did not think there would be very serious heartburning in respect to it, because the tradesmen smashed the price on he be- lieved, and could afford to stand a little while out of their money. # WAITAKI MOUNTED RIFLES. Maior STEWARD (Waitaki) asked the Minis- ter of Defence, What is the reason for the delay which has occurred in gazetting the ac- ceptance of the services of the Waitaki Mounted  Rifles? Earlier in the session the right honour- able gentleman had been good enough to in- form him that the services of the Waitaki Rifles had been accepted. No notification of   acceptance. however, had appeared in the Gazette, and as the official notification was naturally looked for, and a good many weeks bad elapsed, he put the question of which he had given notice in order to ascertain why the notification had not appeared. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said there was no reason why it should not appear, and he anticipated it would appear in the next Gazette. # RETURNED TROOPERS' MEDICAL EXAMINATION. Major STEWARD (Waitaki) asked the Minis- ter of Defence, Whether, in cases in which returned troopers have to be examined by a Medical Board, he will arrange for such ex- aminations to take place, wherever possible, in the towns in which such troopers reside, so as to avoid the expense and inconvenience which occurs under the existing regulations-e.g., troopers whose homes are at Oamaru having to be forwarded at the expense of the department to Dunedin, although there are several fully competent medical men resident at Oamaru who could conduct the examinations equally well? He had made a representation by letter to the Minister, who had been good enough to say that he approved 'the suggestion he had made, and that instructions would be given for the examination of returned troopers to be held in their own places of residence. He simply wished to know whether that promise had been carried out, and whether the promised arrange- ment was in progress now or would be so shortly. Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said regu- lations were being drafted to obviate the neces- sity of men being sent away from their homes to go before the Medical Board for examina- tion. # WAIMATE COURTHOUSE. Major STEWARD (Waitaki) asked 4.0. the Government, Whether they will make the necessary provision this session for urgently needed repairs and renovation of the Courthouse buildings, Justices' room, and fence at Waimate, as recommended by the In- spector of Public Buildings ? The Courthouse in question was a very valuable and handsome building, and it was taken over by the General Government from the Provincial Government. Nothing had been done in the shape of repairs or anything of the kind for twenty-two years, with the exception of one occasion, when a leak was discovered in the roof. He was ad- vised that two years ago the Inspector of Public Buildings recommended the carrying- of out certain repairs, painting, et cetera, and the erection of a new fence. He was also \---- - informed that representations were made by the local Justices of the Peace some twelve months ago to the Justice Department as to the discreditable condition of the room set apart for the use of Justices. On making in- quiries of the Minister of Justice he ascertained that these representations, which were forwarded through the Stipendiary Magistrate, had mis- carried, and thereupon fresh representations had been made to the Minister. He hoped that provision would be made for the matters re- ferred to in his question. Mr. HALL - JONES (Minister for Public Works) said he was obliged to the honourable member for drawing his attention to this matter. It was a desirable thing when there were good buildings to see that minor repairs were attended to. He would have further in- quiries made into this matter, and see if the urgency of the repairs made the work neces- sary ; and, if so, they would be attended to. # COMMISSIONERS OF EDUCATION RESERVES. Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) asked the Government, Whether, when appointing Com- missioners of Education Reserves for the Pro- vincial District of Auckland, the claims of Whangarei and the Thames districts, both having high schools, will be duly considered, and that representatives of those districts will be appointed as Commissioners ? His reason for putting this question on the Order Paper was this : that in the Province of Auckland the Commissioners of Education Reserves, par- ticularly those reserves set aside for secondary education, were mostly gentlemen who lived in 
<page>232</page>
those districts where high schools had been established, although they were entitled to a proportion of the revenue derived from those reserves, were unable to get any statement of account from the Commissioners. The Board of Governors of the Whangarei High School had repeatedly applied to the clerk of the Com- missioners for a statement showing the receipts from the reserves, and showing how the receipts had been allocated to the different high schools, but the Commissioners positively refused to render any statement of account or give any information whatever to the Board of Go- vernors. It would therefore be seen at once that, in making appointments of Commissioners for those reserves for those districts where high schools existed, those localities should be re- presented on the Commission. The Thames district, he believed, had made complaints for the same reason. They were also in the same position as the Whangarei district was in, and he hoped the Government would bear this in mind in making any fresh appointments, so that the Thames and Whangarei districts should have representatives on the Commission. He could assure the honourable gentleman that there was a very strong feeling of irrita- tion in the Provincial District of Auckland owing to the refusal of the secretary of the Board of Commissioners to furnish any infor- mation as to how the funds from these educa- tion reserves were disbursed amongst the various secondary schools. Mr. HALL - JONES (Minister for Public Works) said the School Commissioners for the District of Auckland were appointed under "The Education Reserves Act, 1877." They were Messrs. Lennox, Mueller, and Shera, appointed by the Government, and Messrs. Luke and Udy appointed by the Education Board. They were appointed for three years, and their present period of office would expire in March next. The revenues derived from the reserves set apart for secondary education were appropriated by the School Commissioners at their discretion for the advancement of se- condary education in their respective provin- cial districts. Last year the Thames and Whangarei High Schools received from the School Commissioners a sum of $80. The matter referred to by the honourable member was a proper subject for consideration when re- appointments were to be made, in March next. RECREATION AND FOREST RESERVES. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) asked the Minister for Public Works, If he will introduce an amendment to the Public Works Act, pro- viding .- (1) That land may be taken compul- sorily for recreation-ground purposes ; and (2) that forest lands may be taken for the purpose of preserving the forest and native fauna ? He might point out that even in Wellington there was a desire to purchase some land for the pur- pose of preserving the foreshore to the com munity, and that could not be done unless some amendment was made in the law. To acquire land for recreation purposes was one of Mr. R. Thompson could be purchased. As the law now stood the local bodies had not the power to enable them to do that. With regard to forest land, he might point out one instance that he knew of where there was a patch of bush land, and there was a desire expressed by the people in the district that it should be purchased. The owner valued it at £20 per acre, and for taxing purposes it was valued at ₺5 10s., but when the owner was approached with regard to the sale of the property he said he would not take less than £20 an acre, and the local body had either to submit to pay that or go without. When the bush was taken off that land it would prac- tically be valueless, or be only suitable for growing cocksfoot grass upon it. If bush did exist near a town, and the public in the neigh- bourhood desired to preserve it for public pur- poses, the local body should have the power to take it. Mr. HALL - JONES (Minister for Public . Works) said this opened up a very large ques- tion -namely, the taking of land for recreation purposes, and also of reserves of forest land. The powers under the present Act were exten- sive, and it was a question as to whether the provisions should be extended in order to meet these cases. No doubt in many cases such re- serves were desirable; but he was not aware that the Government had had representations by the local authorities that what the honour- able member asked should be done. However, the matter was an important one, and when any amended legislation dealing with the Public Works Act was brought before the House he would look closely into this matter and see whether the request of the honourable gentle- man was advisable. OEO NATIVE LAND. Mr. McGUIRE (Hawera) asked the Goveru- ment, Whether their attention has been called to the fact that the sand is increasing seriously on Native land at Oeo, on the west coast of the North Island ; and whether they propose to take any action in the matter ? This was a most important question-one deserving the serious consideration of the Government. He would now read a letter he had written to the Public Trustee in reference to it :- " On Monday, the 1st instant, as the Hon. Hall-Jones and I were returning from Opunake by the Great South Road, when we arrived at Pihama, and again at Oeo, our attention was called to the destruction of property that is taking place in the neighbourhood by the inroad of drift sand, particularly at Oco. Hun- dreds of acres of first-class land have already been destroyed, and, if permitted to go on, the whole of that portion of the district is in danger. The property in question is, I believe. Native land, and, in the interest of the owners, district, and colony, I sincerely trust that some action will be taken to stop the invasion, for. if allowed to go on in the future as in the past. it is only a matter of time until the whole of this particular portion of the coast will become worthless. The Hon. Hall-Jones promised to 
<page>233</page>
Wellington. I am, however, satisfied that if you can take action you will do so at once." He received a reply from the Public Trustee on the 10th April :- "I beg to thank you for your letter of the 3rd instant, which reached me on the 9th, on the subject of the encroachment of the sand on a large extent of property near the sea - coast at Oeo. I know the property re- ferred to, and also regret to see the destruc- tion that is going on, and which the Public Trustee some time back tried to prevent, but was advised that he had no right of inter- ference, as the land is a compensation award granted to a Native named Hone Pihama for loval services rendered to the Government in the early troublesome days, and the Public Trustee has therefore, unfortunately, no juris- diction in the matter." He was induced to write to the Public Trus- tee thinking that he might be able to apply a remedy, but found that the Public Trustee was He was desirous of bringing the powerless. matter before the Government. The question was a most serious one, not only affecting the Native owner, but also the land of the settlers in the immediate neighbourhood. Something should be done, and that without delay. He aiways understood that there was no wrong without a remedy, and he hoped that the Native Minister would be able to give him a satisfactory answer, and that immediate action would be taken to put a stop to this sand drift, which, if permitted to go unchecked,  must eventually destroy settlers' land in that neighbourhood. The question was a most serious one, if not to the colony, to the settlers and Natives affected. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said he had no doubt that the facts detailed by the honourable gentleman were perfectly correct, but, like him, he was in a difficulty. He did not know exactly what remedy to apply. The property, no doubt, was private property, but at the same time it was property on which the sand was encroaching at such a rate that it imperilled the prospects of the whole district. Consequently, the trouble was a general one, and ought to be considered from a district point of view. He thought all the residents in that district ought to meet and draw up some scheme to be put into a public Act to deal with this question, the same as other public Acts were made to deal with noxious weeds and other pests which militated against the welfare of a community. If sand was going to prove a great evil in that district it ought to be grappled with in the same way. He was quite prepared, on behalf of the Government, to confer with the honourable gentleman as to any steps ad- visable under the circumstances ; but whatever was done he was quite sure should be done by the district as a whole. He thought that was the only way to deal with it, for to expect a private individual to take the necessary steps to prevent the encroachment of sand which was likely to overrun the district was too much to saddle any one with. Mr. HEKE (Northern Maori) asked the Native Minister, Whether he will see to the betterment of the Maori hostelry at Waipapa, Auckland, by consulting and arranging with the Public Trustee to have the present build- ings pulled down, with a view of erecting better buildings and improving the sanitary arrange- ments of such hostelry ? Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said he was in sympathy with the question asked by the honourable gentleman. He had consulted the Public Trustee, and had found that the Maori hostelry at Auckland was maintained by rents received from certain Native reserves at Auckland and Onehunga, which amounted to about £194 15s. The cost of maintenance only amounted to about £30, and consequently there was a fair amount of money in hand to the credit of that institution. The Public Trustee admitted that the present house was dilapidated, and he favoured the erec- tion of a new building. He thought they should put up a commodious building at Auckland for the comfort and convenience of the travelling Maori public. They were going to do the same thing at New Plymouth, because Natives travelling to the north by way of Taranaki found considerable difficulty in obtaining accommodation at any of the hotels. The hotelkeepers for some reason would not take the Natives in, if only for a night, and they had to look round and get accommodation where best they could. These hotelkeepers were only too glad to take the Maoris' money over the counter, and fill them up with indifferent liquor; but when they asked for board and lodging it was denied them. It was a matter that required to be looked into, for a racial prejudice of that kind should not be tole- rated in a country like this. There were Natives and Natives, he admitted, but when the objection was wholesale and general he took exception to it. The Government therefore intended to put up an hostelry at New Plymouth for the accommodation of Na- tives. According to the estimate which they had supplied them they were of the opinion that the institution would be self-supporting, and no cost to the colony. Mr. HEKE asked if the Government would also deal with the hostelry at Onehunga. Mr. CARROLL said, Yes. # HOHAIA PATUONE. Mr. HEKE (Northern Maori) asked the Go- vernment, If they will have a monument erected over the grave of Hohaia Patuone, of Hokianga, the deceased having been a leading chief of the district, and a nephew of the late Tamati Waaka Nene ? Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said he had made inquiries into this question, but he had not had replies yet. Generally, he might say the Government were anxious to pay fitting tribute to the memory of those who occupied high positions and were leading men among the Maori race in different parts of the colony, and whose names had been associated largely 
<page>234</page>
family to which the question referred, but did not know whether the individual mentioned was one of those who took an active part in the events of those days. They had, he thought, erected a monument for his uncle or his father. The Government would consider this question, and if they came to the conclusion that they had not sufficiently paid respect to that par- ticular family, then they would erect the monu- ment asked for by the honourable member. RAILWAY CONCESSIONS TO MAORIS. Mr. KAIHAU (Western Maori) asked the Government, Whether, in view of the fact that the Government have placed such restrictions upon Maori lands in the North Island as to render it a matter of impossibility for the Maori owners to lease or otherwise deal with the said lands in such a manner as to derive any benefit therefrom, they will therefore grant to the said Maoris the concession of permitting them to travel on all railway-lines throughout the North Island at half-rates ? Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) said he did not know whether the honourable gentleman was already anticipating the near future in the way of the coming election or not, but evidently he evinced a desire to have something of a roseate hue to place before his constituents. With the first part of the question he, of course, entirely disagreed, because it was hardly in ac- cordance with the facts of the question. Al- though the Government had placed restrictions on the Maori lands of the North Island, so as  to compel the operations and alienations in connection therewith to pass under a proper scrutiny, that did not mean that the Govern- ment absolutely debarred all transactions in   Native lands. If there was any exception to be taken to the present nature of the laws affecting Native lands the honourable gentleman was as much responsible for it as any one else. How- ever, he could assure the honourable gentleman that his desire to have the alienations of Native lands carried into effect would be considerably facilitated and lightened when they had the Bill which was on the Order Paper passed into law this session. He would claim the honour- able member's co-operation in connection with that Bill, and he was sure he would give his valuable assistance, because he was one of those anxious to smooth the way for the alienation of Native lands. But that that should be a rea- son why he should ask that Maoris should travel on the railways of the colony at half-rates he could hardly understand. The honourable gentleman might communicate with his col- league the Minister for Railways, but he would advise him, if he did so, to adduce some stronger reasons than contained in this question. # CONSTABLE PARKER. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked the Minister of Justice, Whether he will give effect to the recommendation of the Public Petitions A to L Committee with regard to ex-District Con- stable Parker of Waiuku-namely, "That, in Mr. Carroll by ex-Constable Henry Parker, this Committee recommends that the usual retiring-allowance be granted to him "? He did not think it was necessary for him to say very much by way of explanation, because he believed, from a con- versation he had had with the Minister, he understood all the circumstances of the case. The petition, was signed not by the individual himself, but by the settlers in the district of which he had charge for about thirty-five years. It might be said the duties of a district con- stable were light; and that was so, under ordinary circumstances ; but he would remind the Minister that the district of which Mr. Parker had charge was now in charge of a con- stable getting something like three times the salary paid to District Constable Parker. He might be told that it was not usual to pay a retiring-allowance to district constables, but he could refer the Minister to a case in which a retiring-allowance was so paid ; it was to be found in the report of the proceedings of the Police Commission, where a constable named E. S. Thompson was paid a district allowance of £118 128. 6d. That precedent having been established, he hoped to get a favourable reply to his question. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) ad- mitted that this officer had done very good service. But district constables had hitherto not been granted retiring - allowances. He wished to impress on the honourable gentle- man the fact that they were allowed to follow their own occupation, and only acted as con- stables when called upon, receiving a small salary for their services. Section 15 of "The Police Force Act, 1886," which governed the question of compassionate allowance, confined the granting of such to "rewards for extra- ordinary diligence or exertion, or as compen- sation for wounds or severe injuries received in the performance of their duty," or for " disablement by bodily injury received," or when "worn out by length of service." Dis- trict Constable Parker could not be said to come under any of those headings. In the case under discussion he might say that for many years District Constable Parker held a mail- contract, and was therefore receiving public money in that direction also, in addition to following other private pursuits. He could not give the honourable gentleman any hope of anything being done in this case. In regard to the petition, they all knew how ready people were to sign petitions, especially in favour of an officer who had done good service in any district. It was very easy to get a whole dis- trict to sign a petition ; but the Government had to look upon these matters entirely from a public point of view, and unless there was any special circumstances he could not depart from the ordinary course. DISTRICT COURTS. Mr. HANAN (Invercargill) asked the Minister of Justice, If he will consider the desirability of abolishing the District Courts of the colony, and arranging for Judges of the Supreme Court 
<page>235</page>
sidered by many of the Law Societies in New Zealand, and they held the opinion that it would be a step in the right direction to abolish District Courts and arrange for Judges of the Supreme Court to go on circuit. If that were done it would tend towards placing the higher administration of justice on a better, more advanced, and efficient footing than at pre- sent. He would like to see a Select Com- mittee or a Commission appointed, consisting of Judges and lawyers, with the Under-Secre- tary for Justice, to consider this question, and also the important matter of what improve- ments could be made in connection with the practice and procedure of the Courts. He felt satisfied it would secure good results in the way of having the practice and procedure of the Courts so simplified that litigation would be cheaper and access to the Courts of the colony be made far more easily available to the poorest classes of the community. He thought the matter deserved serious considera- tion. The question of legal reform in connec- tion with Court tribunals and simplifying their practice and procedure was receiving attention in other colonies, and it behoved us to give consideration to the subject. The Dis- triet Court, being an inferior Court, its cases were not recognised as standard judicial deci- sions. People had not such confidence in it as in the Supreme Court. In many parts of the colony, where there were sittings of the District and Supreme Courts respectively, it was found that few cases were brought before the District Court ; consequently its business was to a large extent confined to the granting of probates, bankruptcy proceedings, and other Chamber work. He hoped the Minister would take the matter into serious consideration, and also his suggestion that something should be done in the direction he had indicated in regard to the question of cheapening litigation. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) 4.30. quite admitted that the honourable gentleman brought a qualified mind to bear on the subject, and the views he had expressed were worthy of consideration. At the same time he might say there was no immediate intention to abolish the District Courts. The suggestion that the Judges of the Supreme Court should go on circuit was a very im- portant one indeed, and he would take it into consideration ; but he could not promise that any alteration would be made in the present arrangements. He admitted the honourable gentleman's views were of considerable weight. He desired to say, however, that he had not been approached by the Law Society with a similar request, and until there was a stronger desire on behalf of the legal profession, and also on behalf of the public, he could not say he was prepared to comply with the request. SUPERANNUATION OF JUDGES. Mr. HANAN (Invercargill) asked the Minister of Justice, When the proposed Bill to provide for the compulsory superannuation of Judges at the age of sixty or sixty-five years will be intro- a reflection on old age. He desired to say, how- ever, that he did not wish in any way to cast a reflection at all on the ages or capabilities of the present Judges. The question was put simply with the view of removing from office men who might in the future, unfortunately, when they reached a certain age, become un- fitted through weakness of intellect and other- wise unqualified for the high and responsible position of a Judge of the Supreme Court. No doubt it was true that in many professional walks of life the older men got the more able Yet they became to perform their duties. there were cases of men, when they attained a very old age, who became weak in intellect. But there was this distinction between the two cases : The men in the professional walks of life, when they became greatly advanced in years, were to some extent under the super- vision of the public -- that was to say, that people were not compelled to seek their advice,. nor were they absolutely subject to their de- cisions. On the other hand, a Judge of the Supreme Court, no matter how weak in in- tellect, could not be removed, and consequently the people's rights to obtain sound judgments were somewhat prejudiced. That was the distinction between the position of a Supreme Court Judge and one who was in a political or professional position in the colony. The people could judge of the capabilities of, and had some. option in removing their business from, pro- fessional men when they reached a very ad- vanced age. This option did not exist so far as the Supreme Court Judges were concerned. Some provision, he thought, should be made whereby men who were holding such great responsibilities as the Supreme Court Judges. did should be removed, if deemed expedient, when they reached a great age, and when their administration of the laws might be- come unsatisfactory. There was one Judge in the colony who had reached a very ripe old age, and who was alleged to be somewhat un- fitted thereby to satisfactorily adjudicate in cases-at any rate, complaints had been made as to the way in which he performed his duties. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER did not think the honourable gentleman was in order in making remarks reflecting on Judges of the Supreme Court. There was only one way to question the conduct of a Judge, and that was to bring a motion before the House. Mr. HANAN recognised that Mr. Deputy- Speaker was quite right in what he said. He (Mr. Hanan) simply wished to say there should be some control over men occupying high and responsible positions, so that they might be removed when it was found that they were unfitted to carry out efficiently the important duties intrusted to them. He did not in any way wish to interfere with the independence of the Supreme Court Judges. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Justice) said the Ministry had no Bill in progress with such an object in view as was suggested by the honour- able member. The question of the age of pub- 
<page>236</page>
it was one that had been under the considera- tion of the Government for some time-not specially with reference to Judges, but with reference to public servants generally. With regard to the Judges, he thought the Judiciary of New Zealand stood on a very high plane, and that the public had absolute confidence in the Judges, whose merits were well known. # INSPECTION OF COAL-MINES. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) asked the Minister of Mines, If he will make provision, either in his Coal-mines Bill or on the supple- mentary estimates, for the appointment of competent miners, at each coal-mine in the colony employing ten men or over, for the pur- pose of assisting the Inspector of Mines in his duties of inspection by sending him a monthly report on the working of the mine, and per- forming such other duties as may be defined by the Minister of Mines ; and also make pro- vision for the payment of a small sum of money per annum as a retainer to such men as may be appointed ? He need hardly say to the Minister that in the opinion of coal- miners-an opinion that was shared by many others besides coal-miners -- the inspection of coal-mines was not what it ought to be-not owing to incompetency on the part of the Inspectors, but owing to the fact that the Inspectors were called on to do more work than they should be called on to do. The districts were too large. To appoint Inspectors to keep the mines up to the state to which they should be kept would, he admitted, be very expensive, and therefore it was that he now asked the Minister to appoint a retainer in each mine to send to him a monthly re- port of the working of the mine. If some- thing was not done in that direction they would have another catastrophe similar to Kaitangata or Brunner, and it was with the object of obviating that that he asked the Minister now to either appoint more Inspec- tors, or to appoint competent miners at each coal-mine in the colony to assist the Inspector of Mines by sending him a monthly report on the working of the mine. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) said the honourable gentleman in explaining the ques- tion had introduced some matter that was of a debatable character. For himself, he thought there was no necessity to employ coal-miners to assist the present Inspector of Mines. Sec- tion 43 of the Coal-mines Act required persons in coal-mines to satisfy themselves as to the safety of the mine in which they were em- ployed, and to report anything which might be likely to produce danger of any kind. Failure to do this rendered the miners liable to be pro- ceeded against for an offence under the Act ; while subsection (46) of section 33 of the Act empowered persons employed in a mine to appoint, at their own cost, two of their num- ber to inspect the mine once at least in every month. It was hardly necessary to introduce the question of accidents into the matter. If it came to that, he would like to say that the Mr. McGowan from anything of the kind. On only one occa- sion had there been anything like a serious accident. Hon. MEMBERS .- TWO. Mr. McGOWAN said, Yes ; he might say there were two. At any rate, taking the whole of the mines in New Zealand, he could say they were very free from accidents, mainly owing to the efficient inspection that took place. Dur- ing the past two years or so, owing to the great expansion of the mining industry in the way of dredging, the work of the Inspector of Mines in Otago and Southland had no doubt increased considerably, but he was now provided with the services of an assistant, and the inspection would now be more complete. He might say there was an amendment to the Mining Act in contemplation, in which he was endeavouring to provide for additional inspection, and if the House thought anything more was necessary the matter could be further dealt with when the Bill came down. # PAEROA RIVER. Mr. PALMER (Ohinemuri) asked the Minister of Mines, If he has received any decision from his department re the silting-up of the Paeroa River, and will the Government this session take into consideration what means they intend to adopt to abate this evil ? Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) said it was not within the province of the department to give any decision. He had complied with the promise he made to the settlers in that district, and had had a report made, and he intended to send copies of that report to the local bodies concerned. # AUBREY'S CASE. Mr. PALMER (Ohinemuri) asked the Minister of Justice, What is the cause of the delay in the Governor in Council coming to a decision in Aubrey's case, and when may the decision be expected to be given ? Since this question had been put on the Order Paper it had been answered by the Government by letter, and he simply wished to place on record this fact: that he disagreed with the decision they arrived at, not to remit the sentence of this man. WAITEKAURI PUBLIC BATTERY. Mr. PALMER (Ohinemuri) asked the Minis- ter of Mines, If he will again consider the ad- visability of establishing a public battery at Waitekauri ? He would urge the same reasons as he did last year. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) might say that when he was in that part of the district he was interviewed upon this subject, and from the information he then had he was obliged to decline the application. He had since obtained a further report on the subject, and he would give the honourable gentleman the benefit of that report. It read as follows :- "I cannot recommend the erection of a test- ing plant to your favourable consideration, as there are no less than five separate crushing plants, consisting of fifty-nine heads of stamps, 
<page>237</page>
crushing plant should be erected by the Govern- ment unless in connection with a School of Mines. and under the supervision of the instruc- Instead of tors of Schools of Mines. erecting testing plants, I would recommend to your favourable consideration the advisability of granting subsidies to the local bodies to assist prospectors to pack, sledge, cart, or crush from 1 to 10 tons of ore to or at the nearest crushing-mill available to the place where the ore is obtained." Under these conditions, he was sorry to say, he could not comply with the honourable gentleman's request. The experience in regard to the erection of these batteries, unless in con- nection with Schools of Mines, had not been of a very favourable character. LAND AND LIVE-STOCK AUCTIONS BILL. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) asked the Minis- ter of Lands, If he intends to proceed with the Land and Live-stock Auctions Bill this session ; and, if not, why not ? He trusted to have a favourable reply from the Minister. Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) said he had already introduced that Bill, and it was now before the Joint Stock Committee of both Houses : and he intended, when the evidence was finished and the report was made by that Committee, to proceed with the Bill, and give honourable members an opportunity of passing or rejecting it. Mr. FLATMAN asked, Would the evidence be printed ? Mr. DUNCAN .- Yes.  # SHEEP-DIP. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) asked the Minis- ter for Agriculture, If he does not think the time has arrived when manufacturers of sheep- dip should be compelled to label all vessels con- taining dip, showing the strength of the dip so contained ; and, if so, will he introduce a Bill this session to enforce that being done? This was rather an important question. The ves- seis that contained sheep-dip might have " 100 to 1" on them, meaning that the mixture should be 100 gallons of water to 1 of dip; but that did not show the strength the dip con- tained, and if there was not sufficient strength in the stuff to mix with 100 gallons of water, then it was not the fault of the farmers who mixed it. It was time that it should be speci- fied on each vessel the strength of the dip which it contained, and then any blame in regard to the mixture would rest with the farmers. At the present time prosecutions were going on, and he had been informed that Inspectors had actually ordered sheep to be dipped which were Dear lambing, which was a dangerous practice. But, at any rate, he did not say that the In- spectors were wrong. The owner of the sheep was wrong for taking them into the saleyards in a dirty condition. He hoped that some pro- tection could be given, and that the sheep-dips would have a formula attached so that they could be analysed on the application of any one concerned. thought a certificate had to be given at the present time as to the strength of the dip sub- mitted for sale; but he believed, as was stated by the honourable gentleman, that it would be better to have that appear on the vessel that contained the dip. But to do that, he pointed out, it would be necessary to have a Bill passed so that a penalty could be imposed, but he questioned whether there would be any time this session to do so. # EDUCATION BOARD RESERVES. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) asked the Minis- ter of Lands, If any complaints have reached him regarding the administration of reserves held by Education Boards, or university au- thorities, and if he does not consider that such lands would be more advantageously managed under direct control of the Lands Department ? Complaints had reached him that lands had not been dealt with fairly, and he knew, himself, in some instances that no provision was made for allowing for improvements on the expiration of the lease, and he had with his own eyes seen a house bolted together so that it might be taken away at the end of the term. He thought, both in the interests of the lessees and land- lords, that such leases should not be in exist- ence, because they did not encourage tenants to make improvements, for the reason that they may lose the money which the improvements have cost them at the end of the term. There- fore he thought these lands would be better managed than as at present if they came under the management of the Lands Department. Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) said it was scandalous the way some of these reserves were dealt with by the Education Commissioners in the past and at the present time. He could give case after case where the administration at the present time was enough to make one annoyed, as it were. The member for Hawera could give a case in point where a man had spent ₺1,500 in substantial improvements, and he would be turned out in two years' time without a single shilling for those improve- ments. Mr. PIRANI .- That was the law. Mr. DUNCAN. - It was the law ; but it was not necessary they should go past the laws, as many of them had done. At any rate, he thought it was a bad state of things that caused a man to lose his money in that way. It had a very bad effect upon those reserves. In many cases the land had been disposed of at a very low price, and the proceeds had not been dealt with according to law. # LIME. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) asked the Minister of Lands, When the return re cost of producing lime, ordered by the House on the 19th Sep- tember, 1900, will be laid on the table ? Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) said this return would be ready very soon, and when it was ready it would be laid on the table. 
<page>238</page>
Agriculture, Whether, before approving of the plan of any abattoir intended for the purposes of any large centre of population, he will insist on the addition of chilling-rooms, so as to enable butchers to kill their stock in moderately large quantities as soon as conveniently after they reach the abattoir, and leave the same in such chilling-rooms until required for shop purposes, and thus prevent the deterioration of the meat in quality by keeping the animals alive for lengthened periods upon the abattoir premises ? Mr. DUNCAN (Minister of Lands) said the first part of the question was rather a large order. He did not think the department could insist on anything in this way, although he might say at once it was a matter for serious consideration by those who erected abattoirs, and in his opinion it would be much better if it were done, because the meat would then keep for several days in good condition. It would also avoid cattle being kept in the yard without anything to eat, and sometimes without any water. Such stock could not be in the best con- dition for killing. If the cattle were killed soon after being removed from their pastures before they began to fall off in condition it would be a great advantage to the butchers and to the public. He had, however, no power to insist on the erection of these chilling-rooms. # BOILERMAKERS AT ADDINGTON WORKSHOPS. Mr. G. J. SMITH (Christchurch City) asked the Minister for Railways, Whether he is pre- pared to carry out the promise made to the boilermakers at the Addington Workshops about twelve months ago-namely, that, as they were offered 12s. to 13s. per day by private firms, the Government would give them an advance of 6d. per day, and a further 6d. per day in twelve months from that date ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said, From very careful inquiries and comparisons made as to rates of wages current in outside employ, it was considered that the Government railway workshops employés were now being paid at a rate which compared very favourably and equitably with similar workers outside. He might say that the Government were looking into this matter, because they realised that a great responsibility rested with the Govern- ment in respect to this question-namely, that they should see that a fair wage was paid to Government employés, and that, at all events, the Government should not be behind, but, if anything. they should be a little ahead of, private employers. ## MRS. L. J. NUTT. Mr. STEVENS (Manawatu) asked the Post- master-General, If he will direct that the sum of $70 be paid to Mrs. L. J. Nutt, of Marton, that being the balance of £140 which the Pub- lic Petitions M to Z Committee recommended should be paid to her as compassionate allow- ance in consequence of the death of her late husband, who had for many years been em- tions Committee made a very strong recom- mendation in regard to this case. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said there was a standing rule with Ministers that it was only in extreme cases that they granted an amount equal to a year and a half's salary as com- passionate allowance. They originally granted to Mrs. Nutt an amount equal to a year's pay, £140. She then petitioned the House, and the Committee recommended the grant of an ad- ditional year's pay, for the following reasons :- "This Committee is strongly of opinion that the death of the petitioner's husband was accelerated if not entirely caused by over zeal on behalf of the department he was serving, and that, under these circumstances, the peti- tioner is entitled to a further compassionate allowance of $140." The matter was reconsidered by the Govern- ment, and it was directed that a further sum of $70 should be granted, which was equal to another half-year's salary. That amount was placed on the supplementary estimates last year, and the amount was paid to Mrs. Nutt. The Government had a large number of such cases, and if they broke through the rule in one case they would have to break it in every case. He did not think, on what had been brought before the Government, it would warrant them going any further than they had gone. RAILWAY RATES FOR TIMBER. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) asked the Minister for Railways, Whether, when adjusting railway rates for the haulage of timber, he will make a reduction in the present charges for the car- riage of hardwood imported from Australia re- quired for making gates and hurdles for farm use, as the present charges for small lots of hardwood are excessive? He might mention that a farmer in his electorate gave an order for 345 ft. of hardwood imported from Australia. It was delivered at Waipara, forty-one miles from Christchurch, at a cost of 19s. 8d., or at the rate of 5s. 8d. per hundred feet for haulage of a hundred miles-25 per cent. of the retail value of the timber. This class of timber was not obtainable here in New Zealand, and it was absolutely necessary for making gates and hurdles on farms. Surely under these circum- stances it was not unreasonable to complain of the prohibitive railway tariff on this wood. He hoped the matter would be carefully looked into by the Government, and that the grievance would be removed. It was absurd to tax this class of timber, which had to be imported. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said the Govern- ment must consider every circumstance in deciding or fixing the rate at which goods or timber were to be carried on the railways ; and the amount which had been fixed-and which was not fixed recently-was simply one-half more than was charged for the railage of New Zealand timber. He entirely disagreed with the honourable member in respect to the timber re- quired for gates. In New Zealand we had got 
<page>239</page>
ported for that purpose. We had got timber in the Auckland District superior to anything that could be imported. An Hon. MEMBER .- Why do you import sleepers ? Mr. SEDDON said that they could not get puriri in the quantity and at the price, and that was the reason. He at once disclaimed that these rates had been fixed with a view to making a differentiation with respect to the timber of other colonies ; but it was a well- kuown fact that the other colonies now were putting on a special rate for the export of timber that was coming to our country. Now, they were, with a view of exporting timber, reducing the freight on the railways for white pine, and in this respect he would repeat that we ought to encourage in our country the use of our own hard timbers. This was a small impost, and he did not suppose on a gate it would amount to more than 1s. Mr. BUDDO .- It would make 3s. difference on a gate. Mr. SEDDON said, If it made that differ- ence, they ought to use New Zealand timber. # PRODUCE MARKETS. Mr. FIELD (Otaki) asked the Premier, When he proposes to bring down a Bill, as promised earlier in the session, to compel the larger Municipal Corporations of the colony to esta- blish markets for produce? There was no occasion for him to introduce the question at any length. It was well known that there was  no satisfactory market for European - grown garden produce in the colony. That had been evidenced over and over again by the ex- periences of settlers, who had taken up small areas of land in the hope of making a living for themselves and families, when they found that the profits were entirely eaten up by the middlemen, Chinese rings, and so on. The Municipal Corporations Act gave power to the Corporations to establish markets, but it did not make it obligatory on them to do so. The Premier had already expressed his opinion that the true remedy for this evil was the establish- ment of markets in the large towns, and in answer to a question asked by the honourable member for Masterton this session, he promised to bring down a measure dealing with the sub- ject. What he (Mr. Field) desired to know now was the date when the Government pro- posed to bring down that measure. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said a good deal depended on the progress made by other busi- ness of a more important character. He was of opinion himself that the larger cities in the coiony ought to establish markets in the inter- ests of the producers as well as in the interests of the consumers. There was no doubt that under existing conditions the market garden producers were considerably handicapped, and to have a market so established where the people could go and obtain for themselves their produce, and dispense with the middlemen, which were practically Chinese so far as Wel- lington was concerned, and, he believed, also in I of the mine as it really was his name thing. If the Government found that the local bodies were remiss in doing their duty, and not do without compulsion that which was wanted in the public interest, then, perforce, Parliament would have to do its duty, and in the interests of the consumer and producer compel the establishment of these markets ; but whether they would be able to do it this session or not was another matter. He was afraid by the time they got the Counties Bill through it would be rather late to bring on an amendment of the Municipal Corporations Act. # VOLUNTEER CAPITATION. Mr. FIELD (Otaki) asked the Minister of Defence, Whether, in view of the additional expense and requirements of field artillery as compared with infantry corps, the Government will increase the capitation allowance to the former branch of our Volunteer forces ? Mr. SEDDON (Minister of Defence) said there was a recommendation made by the De- fence Committee last session to the effect that an increase should be made ; but, as it meant providing capitation for eighteen thousand Volunteers this year, compared with practi- cally half that number last year, they came . to the conclusion to hold it over and make further inquiry, and see really what Parlia- ment had to say in respect to this heavy ex- penditure. A good deal in respect to this matter would depend on the discussion they would have in Committee on the Defence esti- mates. In the meantime, it is a case of taihoa. # ADJOURNMENT. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) moved the ad- journment of the House. He did so because of the unsatisfactory nature of the reply given by the Minister of Mines. He asked the Minis- ter if, in the interests of human life, he would make provision, either in his Coal-mines Bill or on the supplementary estimates, for the ap- pointment of competent miners at each coal- mine in the colony employing ten men or over for the purpose of assisting the Inspector of Mines in his duties of inspection by sending him a monthly report on the working of the mine and performing such other duties as may be defined by the Minister of Mines; and also make provision for the payment of a small sum of money per annum as a retainer to such men as may be appointed. In referring to this matter he felt the urgency of it so much that he felt compelled to move the adjournment of the House. What reply did the Minister give him in regard to that question? He quoted section 43 of the Mines Act, and he said the miners' duty was to report anything wrong in the mine ; and, secondly, that the miners had power to appoint two men at their own cost to report as to the state of the mine. The honourable gentleman knew they had that power to appoint Inspectors for years and years, but had rarely ever taken advantage of it. If a man dared to report the state 
<page>240</page>
placed men in an invidious position. What surprised him was the Minister giving that reply in the face of the report of the Royal Commission. Let any man read that report and honestly say that the time had not arrived when some radical alteration should be made in the inspection. Amongst the whole of the coal- mines in the colony, with two or three excep- tions, there was not one in the condition it ought to be. Day by day men were working with their lives in their hands, both from want of proper supervision and the inability of the Inspector to enforce his demands. Here was one quotation :-- "The condition of the workings at the time of our visit in March last was not altogether satisfactory, but so much good work has been done by the present manager, Mr. Broome, that we believe that ere long the mine will be in a proper condition. The ventilation is the chief deficiency at present, and either the connection with the Castle Hill Mine or an upcast shaft must be made. The connection was begun under the former manager, Mr. Straw, and completion was promised in April, 1900; but it was never finished, and Mr. Broome preferred to put in a shaft, but so far that has not been done. The shaft is, in our opinion, preferable, as it would give air by the shortest way. The travelling-road for the men in case of accident was almost impassable, but immediate improvement was promised." What did that amount to ? It was a practical admission that, although the Crown appointed Inspectors in the interests of the men, the manager of the mine could do as he liked. Yet the Minister said they had complete inspection, and that there was no necessity to make any alteration. He would ask members to read the report for themselves and they would find sufficient to warrant the Government in taking further steps for proper supervision. They had had two or three serious instances in the past of what might happen. There were many cases he could point out where men were allowed to go day after day with naked lights. There was no proper supervision, and the report of the Com- mission proved it. The Minister stated he was bringing in a Bill to amend the Coal mines Act ; but what did he propose to do in that Bill ? Nothing but to permit pit-owners to go again and do that which had been prohibited before -namely, to mine under the sea or rivers. The profits of the mine-owner should not be considered before the safety of the lives of the men. Some of the best seams in the colony had been stopped working because they were under the sea, as in the case of Shag Point, where the best coal came from under the sea, and so little did they care for the miners' lives that they were allowed to work there until they could hear the throbbing of the propeller of a steamer over their heads, and it was only when that was shown that the Inspector stopped it and would not allow them to work any longer. He had any amount of evidence to show that the inspection was inadequate, and things were permitted which ought not to be, Mr. Millar mitted in any other part of the world. In cer- tain mines they worked out a certain portion of the mine, and gas was allowed to accumulate in the old workings. In the Old Country, on the contrary, the Inspector saw that these por- tions were bricked off at once, and this was necessary, as it prevented the accumulation of gas, and likewise gave more air to the miners. The honourable gentleman could not go to any district and make inquiries from the men work- ing in the mines without finding corroboration for the information he was giving him. Did he think that was right ? Yet he would not ask for a paltry sum of £1,000 to be voted for the protection of these men. The House would give it if the Minister asked for it. If any calamity occurred the blame would be on the heads of the Government. He asked honour- able members to take the report of the Royal Commission, and they would find that the Go- vernment inspection of coal-mines was not worth a straw. There was the opinion of two practical men, with a Chairman who had a knowledge of mines. If they were men who did not know their work he could understand members saying the report was not worth any- thing, but that was not so. One had occupied the position of a manager in the Old Country. Mr. Lomas was a coal-miner of about twenty- five or thirty years' experience, and always had the reputation of being an honourable and straightforward man. And these two practical men had gone through every mine, and appended their names to the report. Mr. J. ALLEN. - No; they did not go through every mine. Mr. MILLAR said, Well, he would qualify the statement; they had gone through every real mine. Mr. J. ALLEN said they had not gone through every mine. Mr. MILLAR said he could not find a mine they had not been through. Mr. J. ALLEN said they had not been through them all, though they had reported on them. Mr. MILLAR .- All he had to say, then, was, if they did not go through the whole of the mines, it made it all the worse, because if they were to judge of those they had not been through by those that they had been through it made the case still worse. They had gone through the largest mines in the colony -- the coal-mines that were known throughout the colony-and he challenged any honour- able gentleman to take the report and say that there was an absolutely clean mine in the whole lot. It was a state of affairs that had gone on in spite of the inspection-inspection, they had been told, that had been increased of late. In one mine it was said the ventilation was insufficient. An air-shaft was promised to be finished in April, 1900, and in 1901 it was not completed, but it was said some other method was to be adopted. Was that the way the honourable gentleman allowed things to go on ? According to that report the manager of the mine was the Inspector, and the Inspector 
<page>241</page>
reports of the Inspectors were to be taken, then, considering the work now put upon them, and matters allowed to go on as now, then he said, " God help the lives of the men." Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) said he had carefully listened to the remarks of the honourable member for Dunedin City (Mr. Millari, and he challenged that honourable gentleman to say that his statement was a fair statement. Mr. MILLAR. - My statements are taken from the report of the Coal-mines Commission. Mr. McGOWAN said he had no doubt of that, and if he took up the report himself he would undertake to say that from the same report he would be able to produce a statement exactly in the opposite direction. Any one could pick out portions of the report to suit the particular case he was urging. He (Mr. McGowan) did not want, however, to do that. The honour- able member had made statements that went to show that it was the desire of the Govern- ment, or he would say the Minister of Mines- he did not want to drag the Government into it-that men should be employed in dangerous places. Would the honourable member say that he believed that ? Mr. MILLAR .- No; I ask you to make in- quiries. Mr. McGOWAN said, Then why did the honourable gentleman make the statement ? The fact was, the honourable member knew the statement was made for a different purpose altogether. The honourable member could not  but say that he (Mr. McGowan) had shown the greatest care possible in regard to the inspec- tion of the mines of the colony. As for the statements made by the honourable member   for Dunedin City, he wished to give them a distinct denial. With regard to the efforts of the Inspectors, he would, to prove his case, take the case of one mine-one the honourable gentleman had referred to himself, but the name of which he had taken care not to men- tion in his remarks. To show the House that the honourable gentleman's allegation that there had been laxity in the inspection of this mine was not correct, he would give actual proof as to the dates on which inspections were carried on in the mine during the year 1900. That year was what he might call an un- favourable year ; it was the year in which pro- posals were made by the Goldfields and Mines Committee for setting up the Commission. The Kaitangata Mine had been mentioned. It was considered to be, and undoubtedly was, a mine in which a certain amount of care was required-a mine in which there Was a certain amount of danger. Now, that mine was inspected on the 15th May, 1900; it was also examined on the 16th May, 6th Sep- tember, and 21st December. There were there- fore four examinations of the mine during 1900. Mr. MILLAR .- Why were these examina- tions made ? Mr. McGOWAN said he could not tell the unless it coincided with his own views. At bonourable member why they were made, but VOL. CXIX .- 15. point if he had the opportunity of reading the reports. Then, in 1901 the mine was ex- amined on the 14th March, 15th March, and 16th March, in connection with the in- vestigations of the Coal-mines Commission. In addition, the mine had been examined on these dates : 28th February, 1st March, 19th April, 9th July, 10th July, 27th August, 4th September, 20th September. Would the honour- able gentleman say, therefore, that the mine had remained for months and months without being reported on in face of the facts that had just been placed before him ? The honourable gentleman could not say it. Mr. MILLAR said he would tell the Minister all about it later on. Mr. McGOWAN said the honourable gentle- man had informed the House that the inspection of the mines of the colony was incomplete, that the Minister of Mines had been neglectful of his duty, and had not insisted on a proper inspec- tion of the mines, and that the lives of the miners had been jeopardized thereby. It was an ungenerous statement for any member to make, no matter what his object might be in making it. The honourable gentleman pro- bably had the evidence of the Commission before him when he spoke, but he did not have the evidence of the Inspecting Engineer or the evidence of the Inspector, and in his first state- ment he said there was hardly a mine in New Zealand that was in a safe state. Mr. MILLAR .- No, I did not. Mr. McGOWAN said the honourable gentle- man certainly made that statement, and he (Mr. McGowan) refuted it at the time by quot- ing from the report. As a matter of fact, he found from the report that there were only three mines out of seventeen that were ex- amined with regard to which the report was unfavourable. Mr. MILLAR said he could name more than three. The ventilation of no mine was perfect or anywhere near it. Mr. McGOWAN said the position was ex- actly as he had stated it. There were only three mines that were adversely reported upon, and the fact that hardly any accidents occurred in New Zealand was proof of the fact that the inspection carried out was up to the mark. The condemnation, even in the report, so far as it concerned the particular mine referred to, was prior to the present Inspector occupying the position. The previous Inspector was now the Inspecting Engineer, and had not had the opportunity of giving evidence before the Com- mission. He asked that that opportunity should be given to him, and he was informed that his evidence would be heard in Wellington. Was he asked in Wellington to give his evidence ? No, he was not. Mr. R. MCKENZIE said it would not have been worth anything if he had given it. Mr. McGOWAN said, That, of course, might be the honourable gentleman's opinion ; but, no matter what the evidence was, the honour- able gentleman did not think anything of it 
<page>242</page>
show that the contention of the honourable member for Dunedin City was wrong. The whole thing came back to this : it was the object of the member for Dunedin City to get the Government to appoint ten or fourteen miners throughout the colony to do certain work, and to pay them to act as Inspectors of Mines ; and because he (Mr. McGowan) had refused to do this, because it was unreasonable and illegal, the honourable gentleman took up his present attitude. Now, the fact of the matter was that if one wanted to destroy the proper inspection of mines one could not do it better than by paying men to do the work who were already in the mines. If the present In- spectors were not qualified for the work they should be turned out ; but, at any rate, the idea of appointing men who were engaged in the mine should be abandoned. The hour of half-past five o'clock having arrived, the DEPUTY-SPEAKER left the chair. # HOUSE RESUMED. The DEPUTY-SPEAKER resumed the chair at half-past seven o'clock. ROYAL VISIT EXPENSES BILL. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 2 .- "There shall be paid to His Ex- cellency the Governor, without further appro- priation than this Act, the sum of two thousand two hundred and fifty pounds, being the amount of expenses incurred and disbursed by him for and on behalf of the colony on the occasion of  the recent visit to New Zealand of their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York." On the motion of Mr. SEDDON (Premier), the word " expenses " was struck out, and the word "liabilities " substituted therefor; and the word "moneys" was inserted before the word "disbursed." The words "at the request of his Re- sponsible Advisers " were inserted after the word "colony." Clause as amended agreed to. Bill reported. On the question, That the Bill be read a third time, Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) .- Sir, I desire to take this opportunity of saying a few words touching this Bill and its career through the House, and, first of all, I would like to preface what I have to say by remarking that the loyalty of a number of members of this, House has been called in question. An Hon. MEMBER .- NO. Mr. HORNSBY .- Yes ; and in a very ques- tionable manner. Sir, loyalty with me does not mean mere lip service, or the shedding of every drop of our brother's blood. Loyalty, in my opinion, requires of every man who possesses it, if need should be, to make some personal sacrifice in the matter ; but we are beginning to be taught in this country that so long as you wave a flag and beat the drum, and talk about "the dear old flag" and " the dear old Motherland," that spells Loyalty ! ! Mr. McGowan ism. I think if we could get the details of the expenses which have been incurred, and which this Bill proposes to reimburse the Governor for, we should find not only that a good deal of it has been spent in flunkeyism, but also in furbishing the wearers of the costume of the flunkey. Now, Sir, because some members of this House dared to give expression to their thoughts they were told that it was proof that they were the enemies of organized society-Nihilists-because they would not speak with bated breath about the Governor and his position in this colony, or about this request that came down to us in this House to "foot the Bill." It is not unusual, I may say, for this kind of thing to be said about members of the House. For example, last session one member of this House-my honourable friend the member for Christ- church City, who sits beside me, was compared to Antonio Bresci, and this session one of the members-the member for Riccarton-has been referred to ---- Mr. DEPUTY - SPEAKER. - You cannot refer to a previous debate during this session. Mr. HORNSBY .- I say last session the mem- ber for Christchurch City (Mr. Collins) was re- ferred to as Antonio Bresci Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- If you are going to say something about a reference made to the member for Riccarton this session, that is out of order. Mr. HORNSBY. - Very well, Sir. Then, I will say that last year the honourable member for Riccarton was referred to in very " handsome terms," and this session also. We are told that we should not even dare to question the doings of the Premier in matters concerning the welfare of the colony ; and because we have attempted even to criticize some of the expenditure that has been entered into, and which principle we believe to be wrong, we have been told that the decadence of Parliament has undoubtedly set in. Think of it, that because of what has been said the decadence of Parliament has been made manifest ! The Premier bas taken his cue, I suppose, for that utterance from the sycophantic journal of Wellington- a newspaper that one day beslavers the Government with praise and the next day pelts it with mud. Yet on the authority of that sort of newspaper we are to be told that the decadence of Parliament has set in. Decadence, Sir ! Why, if we think back to the time when that sturdy man from the West Coast came here as a democrat, and as the representative of all that was best in democracy-the protégé of the finest Liberal who ever stood in this House, Sir George Grey- and look and listen to him now. I say, if there is any decadence at all, the decadence is very marked in that particular instance. Fuming and fretting in his place in the House because members of this House dare to differ from him, and dare to express their opinions! Sir, I have been marked out for destruction. Mr. SEDDON .- Oh ! Mr. HORNSBY .- Yes, marked out for political extinction - pointed to by the Pre- 
<page>243</page>
polluted source ! Mr. DEPUTY - SPEAKER. - The words having been withdrawn, they should not be commented on. Mr. HORNSBY .- Having been withdrawn ! But they were not apologized for. I was told that the expression that I gave voice to in this House was not the expression of the feel- ing of the people of Wairarapa-that I do not re present the people in my remarks concerning this expenditure, and that he (the Premier) would go into the Wairarapa and put the matter to the test. Sir, from my place here and now I challenge the honourable gentleman to come there on to the public platform with me, repeat those words there, and see what he will Ect in response. The member for Napier seems amused. They say there are some people who are very easily amused ; and I say that if the member for Napier will appear on the platform also, as chief henchman, we will give him a " round turn." I say that if, after the Pre- mier has fulminated against me - even as loudly as he did the other night in this House- before the people of that place in meeting assembled-there will be men of both shades of political opinion there-if he will then put it to the test and the people of the district decide that what I have done is wrong and that he is right, then I will hand in my resigna- tion to the Speaker on the following day. That is as fair a proposition as any member of this House can make to any other member, and I make it, and I repeat my challenge, and ask the  right honourable gentleman to come up into my district and do what on the floor of this House he has threatened he will do. Mr. SEDDON .- You have told me, if I do, that you will resign if a resolution is carried that your action in respect to the matter is not approved by those present. Mr. HORNSBY. - The right honourable gentleman is stating that which is absolutely without any foundation in fact, and he knows it. I have told the Premier in this House before to-night that I am not going to " beck and boo " to him. When I was addressing the people in my electorate in 1899-and any one who feels interested in it can turn up the files of the newspaper and find what I then stated- I declared upon every platform that I would not go into the House tied neck and heels to any man, or to any set of men; that I gave support to the broad principles of Liberalism enunciated by the late John Ballance and carried out by the present Government ; and that so long as they carried out that pro- gramme I would be found fighting side by side with them. But I said something more, for in the manifesto issued to the electors of that d :- trict -it was issued by the thousand, because there were many places in the district where I could not hope to meet the electors, and so this was published far and wide that all men might know on what platform I stood-this is what I said in winding up my manifesto : - " The tendency of late years, on the Opposi- tion as well as the Government side of the for the one great desire to hold or capture the Treasury benches. The war of the 'ins' and the 'outs' has raged unceasingly, until Parlia- ment has become a place for the ' washing of dirty linen,' instead of the discussion and pro- per consideration of measures sought to be placed on the statute-book. If all members would go into the House pledged to support measures - and first clearly define the measures they intend to support-there would be less of strife, acrimony, and personal rudeness. There- fore let the motto and the rallying-cry of the Liberals of the Wairarapa be-as it is the motto of their candidate --- measures, not men." Mr. SEDDON .- Kindly allow me to see my " black book," will you ? Mr. HORNSBY .- The Premier is at liberty to ask for his " black-book " and to search it through, but he will find there no evidence of my intention of coming into this House other than I have stated ; and I think, Sir, he would be consulting the dignity of his position if on an occasion of this kind he were to pay the same courtesy and respect to me that I paid to him when he was addressing the House. I am simply defending myself, and this is the first opportunity I have had of doing so. I think he would be consulting his dignity if he were to permit me to go on without interrup- tion, and then when it comes to his turn he can have his say. As I have said, I am not one of the men who believe in " becking and booing." I have never done it, and I am not going to do, either here or anywhere else. I am reminded by the conduct of some of our public men of a comedy known as "The Man of the World," in which there is a character who says to one of the other parties in the play, " I becked and I booed, and see what I am noo-Sir Perti- nax McSycophant." But the Premier is not going to make a Sir Pertinax McSycophant of me. I am not anxious to please any one in par- ticular. What I came here to do, in common with other members, was to have my say in matters that concern the people, and I say that this is one of the most vital questions that we have had before us since Parliament met this year. This matter of expenditure of public funds aims at the whole structure, so far as we are concerned as the guardians of the public purse. We are sent here to watch the expenditure, and if we cannot do it, if it is no longer possible for us to say what we think about the manner of the expenditure of public moneys without being held up to scorn by the leader of the House, why should we be here at all? We may just as well send along a proxy, and allow the Premier to fill in the proxy and act as he likes. An Hon. MEMBER .- That is right. Mr. HORNSBY .- That is right so far as some people are concerned; but I stand here and state that I will not be placed in that position. An Hon. MEMBER .- You will do it to-mor- row. Mr. HORNSBY .- No, I will not, and I hope I never will ; but 1 do say this : that were we to 
<page>244</page>
House, and have a little less of party feeling, we should be better than we are and do more useful work. But it appears to me, Sir, that the moment a man gets up in this House to cross the path of the Premier, even in the slightest degree, the right honourable gentleman turns upon that man as if he were an enemy. Now, I say distinctly and conclusively this : that if to-morrow the existence of the party to which I belong were endangered you would find me fighting on the side of the Premier just as strongly as any of those who are supposed to be his particular friends. I would be found doing as good work as any of them for the cause I have espoused ; but, when I see fit to differ from the Hon. the Premier, I shall differ from him ; and, when I feel inclined to express an opinion in this House, I shall express it, regardless of whom I offend or of whom I please. Let me say this, in conclusion : that the Premier, though he may not believe it, though he may not take what I say as of any value-but I do say that he owes myself and a number of members of this House an apology for what he said to us the other night. I am aware he was excited. I am aware he was pos- sibly labouring under a good deal of feeling at the time; but I do say that in his calmer moments he ought to remember that we have our rights as well as he has ; that we have a certain amount of dignity and a position to keep up as he has, though we are not in so exalted a position ; and I hope he will take the opportunity to tender that which will not in  any way degrade him, that will not in any way take away from his position ; that he will hand- somely apologize for having compared some of the members of this House to men who are a menace to all organized society. Sir, to say that of any honourable member in this House is one of the most dire insults I have ever known hurled across the floor of this House even in the most bitter debates that I have listened to before I became a member. I have never heard a member of the House accusing his fellow-man of such an abominable crime as that of being a menace to organized society. feel it more than anything that has ever been said to me in the whole course of my life-and many cruel and bitter things are said of every public man - but that was the cruelest and bitterest thing that a gentleman occupying the high and responsible position of leader of the House could have said of any man. I have taken the earliest opportunity of replying to the unwarrantable accusations of the Premier, and so long as I have the honour to remain a member of this House, so long will I, in my own proper person, defend my proper rights, and when no longer able to do that I will resign my position and have no more to do with this House or political life. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington 8.0. City) .- I desire to say a few words at this stage of the Bill, not with the intention of further inflaming the Premier ; but I feel it is only due to myself that I should make some comments on the statements made regarding Mr. Hornsby rally. What offended me most was the expres- sion that the member for Wairarapa has taken so much umbrage at, and it was meant to have a particular and personal application to me. Last year, on the second reading of the Governor's Salary and Allowances Bill, the Hon. the Premier thus addressed me : " There are several honourable gentlemen here whom I do not expect to find supporting this measure ; they would have no Governor at all here ; it is against their principles to have a monarchy at all, though their principles are well cloaked." Then he proceeded to connect me with an act of indignity to the Governor, and at a later stage of the session he said that if proposals had been made for the pulling-down of the Constitution they would have received my hearty approval. He accused me by name of holding views of an extremely socialistic ten- dency, and barely checked himself in accusing me of anarchy. Personally I do not take the slightest umbrage at these statements, they are so pal- pably void of truth ; but I do object to it being said generally of members of Parliament. This is not a Parliament of turbulent men, holding extreme and revolutionary views. On the con- trary, it holds most correct and orthodox views. It is, in fact, a tame Parliament. The Premier has succeeded in so subduing the great majority of members that they are sufficiently tame to eat out of the hand, and, if it were not that his solecisms might gain credence amongst the uninformed, I would have taken no notice of it at all. I have not spoken at all upon this Bill until now; but, in his reply on the second reading, the Premier referred directly to me, and said that he had been led to believe-by some mysterious process unexplained - that the senior member for Wellington City (Mr. Hutcheson) would give this Bill his support if- - Mr. SEDDON .- I have told the honourable gentleman before that he was misrepresenting me in this respect. I did mention his name, but not in respect to supporting the Bill : it was in respect to opposing the item on the estimates. I said it had been represented to I me that you would do so ; not that you told me. I never spoke to you. Mr. HUTCHESON .- I desire neither to mis- represent the Premier nor blame him unneces- sarily ; but I want to say as forcibly, yet in as mild language as I can, what I believe to be the case. If I am right in assuming that the information was conveyed to him through the member for Palmerston - Mr. SEDDON .-- No. Mr. HUTCHESON .- Well, I am not to be held responsible for any mysterious rumours about myself. Let me assure the Premier I never had any intention of supporting the Bill, even if he complied with the wish of certain members and removed the vote from the esti- mates and brought it down in the shape of a Bill, as he has done. And, further, I assure .... him I hold these opinions out of no disrespect at all to the representative of the King. But I held, and do hold, those views on the broad 
<page>245</page>
can grant supplies. Unless the Commons did grant Supply to the Ministry - and in this case it did not do so-the Ministry had no right to delegate the power of Supply. That was the broad ground I went on, and no other. But the right honourable gentleman has on many occasions, when he was displeased with members of this House, reflected in the graves manner on every attribute a man holds holy. He has stigmatized by name members of this House as Judas Iscariots, as Antonio Brescis, as anarchists, and has used other most vile terms-terms that I, with all the knowledge of Billingsgate and sailors' slang which he alleges I possess, cannot hope to emulate. But the honourable gentleman did not always hold his present views as to the sacredness of Vice-Royalty. He said wrongly last year that I did not want any representa- tive of monarchy here at all. Sir, those were his own views at another stage of his political career. I have ever and aye said, God forbid that we should have an elective Governor in New Zealand so long as we form part of the British Empire. On public platforms and on the floor of this House I have said so ; but the Right Hon. the Premier has not always said so. At one time he wanted to cut the painter by the abolition of appointed Go- vernors. He was a most keen and ardent supporter of an elective Governor when that idea was put before Parliament by Sir George Grey, and he also spoke very disparagingly of the representative of Royalty in this colony : be spoke in such a manner as I have never yet beard any member of this House speak whose views he alleges are inimical to the safety of organized society. Mr. HORNSBY .- Did he do it with bated breath ? Mr. HUTCHESON .- No ; but I will quote to the House some of the sentiments of the honourable member for Kumara on the second reading of the Election of Governor Bill, moved by Mr. Joyce in 1887, Mr. Joyce then being member for Lyttelton. An Hon. MEMBER .- Is that a "black-book "? Mr. HUTCHESON. - No; it is the record of our debates in this House : it is the Hansard of the colony. An Hon. MEMBER .- That is the blackest book there is. Mr. HUTCHESON .- Yes, it is. The honour- able gentleman said this :-- " My honourable friend who uses that argu- ment knows full well that there is not the slightest connection. The only way finance comes in is this : that, if one of the blue blood at Home " -- these were the remarks of the honourable gentleman who now speaks with bated breath of the "blue blood "-" or some connection of his who has rendered good service to the Government in power for the time being, whose exchequer is in a low state, wants assist- ance. he is sent to a colony to recuperate. There are many cases of that kind on record ; but I think, now that the Government are pro- posing to reduce the Governor's salary, the day is gone by." Now, I ask the House, am I the democrat, or is it the honourable gentleman opposite ? The remarks I have read are to be found in Volume 58 of Hansard, page 308 (1887). Now, Sir, what I deplore is this : It seems to me that all genuine simplicity has gone out of our public life, and has been replaced by a spurious patriotism which is nothing more than hysterical lip- service and sycophancy ; the waving of a flag and the banging of a drum at the head of a drunken rabble counts more as evidence of patriotism than the whole lives of those who see national greatness only in national character. For my part, I echo the sentiments of Kent in "King Lear ": "Nor are those empty hearted whose low sound reverbs no hollowness." And, Sir, it is the hollow vessel that makes the most sound. Now, the honourable gentle- man referred to a newspaper article entitled "The Decadence of Public Life," and said that what was written in the public Press of the colony was true. But he distorted the application of the article he referred to in his effort to prove that the views of some members of this House in connection with the Bill now before us was evidence of the decadence. of pub- lic life, and I charge the honourable gentleman, in the terms of the very text he has set to us, of having been the cause of the decadence of our public life. I will quote from the article written in his own particular paper, the New Zealand Times, in a fit of frankness, and here are some of the sentiments :- "There is, undoubtedly, a sordidness about public life nowadays that is degrading ; and, if it is true that those in public positions but reflect the great body of the people, there is reason in the affirmation that the constituencies are themselves saturated with the qualities of greed and selfishness." Who only can have implanted those qualities of greed and selfishness in the constituencies ? What but the system under which our public- works expenditure is doled out in the public- works estimates. Then, again, the article goes on :- " But as there are men who lack principle, so there are constituencies that judge a member's ability by the amount of public money he is able to have spent within their district." And who is it, I ask again, who makes it a condition precedent on candidature for a seat in this House that the candidate shall ally himself and bind himself to the honourable gentleman, in order that he may support him in this House, and in return receive what an opponent of the Government never can hope to get-namely, proper recognition in the way of expenditure of public money upon public works in his particular district ? Then, the article went further : - " When that is the ruling passion of constitu- encies it inevitably degrades their representa- tives, who become mere playthings in the hands of the dominant party." I need not ask who is the dominant party-the only party, a party of one. But to proceed : -- 
<page>246</page>
degradations they are capable of humiliating themselves to the lowest depths. It cannot be thought that the best men in the community seek to follow a calling in which good charac- ter is either lost or besmirched. The represen- tation of the people, from being one of the . highest, has become one of the least desirable of avocations." Who of all men is entitled to a large share of that censure, and who least of all men might be expected to be found quoting sentiments such as these, but the right honourable gentle- man ? There are gems of truth, and gems that it would be well the Premier should pay full attention to, in this same article he refers to :- "Thus we see some of the worst evils of party government perpetuated in this country, although political parties have practically ceased to exist. Colonial political life is fast assuming the characteristics of the American system, and, although a few good men are still induced to enter public life, politics are largely left to men with nothing else to do." The last quotation I shall make to this House reads as follows :- " We can only hope that there may spring up a new generation of public men, who will live up to higher standards, and institute a system of ' purer manners, better laws."" And, now, I say that no more powerful in- dictment has ever been made of the right honourable gentleman than this said article that he has referred us to in his own particular paper. Now, in his speeches in reply on second  and third readings, the right honourable gentle- man is ruthless and remorseless in his use of abusive language. He knows full well that his is the last opportunity, and he is inspired even to the verge of personal hatred towards those who speak their minds plainly in this House. I only listened to one speech on the second reading of this Royal Visit Expenses Bill in worse taste than the Premier's opening speech, and that was the speech of the right honourable gentleman in reply. I will say very little about the execrable taste of his introductory speech, or how he pleaded with this House to remember the respect due to the exalted position of the Governor, and then gave us all the sordid de- tails of the blankets, bed-linen, glasses, and so forth. But he did not tell us a single word about two expensive sets of four-in-hand brown- russet silver-mounted harness which he himself ordered for the Royal equipage here without reference to any other authority, and which it was found His Excellency would not permit to be used in our crowded streets. And I suppose they have been cast on some rubbish-heap or another, together with many other evidences of his prodigality of the people's money. He told us nothing at all of the expensive liveries that were ordered, also unneeded and unused. The country will never know the prodigality, the absolute recklessness, of the expenditure of their money in connection with the Royal visit. Now, in addition to attacking myself in his closing speech, the right honour- able gentleman made unworthy aspersions on Mr. Hutcheson City (Mr. Atkinson). He put words in his mouth that he never uttered. He distorted other words, and put such a construction upon them as never was intended when they were delivered. Then, he urged that my colleague said that the Governor had been unsparing in the expenditure of the people's money, whereas my colleague said that he had been unsparing in his personal services, meaning thereby to convey to the House that the Governor had taken an active personal part in the arrange- ments, which my friend and I held was some- what derogatory to the high position of Governor. I did hold, and still hold, that he interfered in local concerns to an extent that was not needed ; and this inference of mine does not mean that the Governor lavishly or prodigally spent the people's money, knowing that he had a free hand. Now, Sir, even to this day the great aristo- democrat Premier impeaches members of this House on occasion of sedition, high treason, and disloyalty ; and there, again, he is not him- self of too loyal a character. If we take his recent public utterances we find that he said, à propos the refusal of the Transport Depart- ment of the Admiralty to send the " Tagus " to the Bluff, that "it was this kind of action that lost the American colonies to England." Will honourable members reflect for a moment what was the real suggestion in that public utter- ance ? It was this: "If there is much more of this kind of thing we will do the same as the American colonies did." That is the sugges- tion. Further than that, when it was found that the Imperial troops could not prolong their visit to this colony he said -- at least, he had the audacity to send a cable Home saying that such conduct was reprehensible -- yes, in- considerate and reprehensible. Why, I was astounded at the cool effronterv of the thing, for such a reason, to send to the British Cabi- net an assurance that this important colony thought their conduct was reprehensible. n- deed, it would have been more in keeping with the honourable gentleman's usual expression-to which we are so accustomed that it has become quite hackneyed-if he had said it was " repre- hensible in the highest degree." That is his usual phrase on the slightest provocation. But my reason for deprecating the use of such inflated language lies in the fact that it was absolutely uncalled-for and unwarranted. Now. if honourable members use heated language in rebutting unfounded charges, who is to blame ? If this House were turbulent, and if it did contain members with views hostile to or- ganized society. the right honourable gentleman would be largely responsible. But I deny the aspersion ; and I again say, as my colleague has recently said in a few dignified words, I look upon the Governor as the connecting.link be- tween this colony and the heart of the Empire. I believe also that our constitutional form of government is the best safeguard for the free- dom and well-being of the people, and I have never held any other views, nor have I expressed any other views. But because I rebel against 
<page>247</page>
gusting desire to bask in the presence of great people, this detestable hero-worship, am I to be silent while I am called, forsooth, a turbu- lent rebel, and the insinuation is made that I am nothing more or less than an anarchist ? Despite all the right honourable gentleman may declare or insinuate, I say there is no more law- sinding, peaceful-minded citizen in the whole of His Majesty's broad dominions than I. I will only say, in conclusion, Sir, that the prin- cipal reason for my rising to-night was to again repel the attack the Premier made upon me on this as on a former occasion, when His Ex- cellency's affairs were up for consideration by the House; to state shortly my reasons for voting against the second reading of the Bill ; and also to make it quite clear that I never, by act, word, or deed, gave any indication that I am aware of that I would support the grant if it were embodied in a measure instead of as an item of the estimates. Having done so, I trust the Premier will in future learn to im- pute less unworthy motives to members of the House who differ from him on these questions. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) .- Before the Pre- mier replies I want to have a word or two on the particular phase of this debate alluded to by the two previous speakers. But first I would like to correct an impression current that there Was no precedent in our legislation for the measure introduced in regard to the expendi- ture of local bodies in connection with the Roval visit. In 1887 I find that Sir Julius Vogel introduced a Bill intituled " The Local  Authorities' Jubilee Expenditure Bill," in which the operative clause reads as follows :- " Every local authority may, if it thinks fit, contribute out of the funds of the body which it represents such sum or sums as may be thought expedient in taking part in the cele- bration of the Jubilee of Her Majesty the Queen in the present year; and such con- tribution may be by way of grant or subscrip- tion to one or more objects of commemoration either in or out of the colony, or in public rejoicings or demonstrations of any kind in the colony." The first member to suggest that the Bill should be dropped was the Right Hon. the Premier. The Right Hon. the Premier, who is now exuding in every pore with loyalty, with the desire for expenditure in rejoicings by both the colony and the local bodies, in his place in the House in 1887 opposed the giving of any such power to local bodies, and suggested to the promoters of the Bill that the best way to deal with such a proposal was to adjourn its consideration and drop it ; and the member for Kumara's advice was taken. Yet we have the Premier reproaching members for taking up the attitude he then prided himself upon, and, for- sooth. they are not loyal citizens. The Premier ha- accused me of making remarks derogatory to the Governor, because I have criticized this measure, so that members will be surprised to see in Hansard of 1887 that the Premier then accused a former Governor of making insulting communications to Parliament. In the same the honourable member for Wellington City (Mr. Hutcheson), were some remarks made by the Premier that I think were just as à propos as those he quoted, and it is just as well, perhaps, considering the bluster we are getting, that should be added to what was quoted by the member for Wellington City. The Premier said,- " Then, as regards the argument used that because we borrow money from English capi- talists we should not elect our Governor, but should have a representative of the Government of England as Governor of New Zealand, I say it is a perfect fallacy. What connection is there between finance and the election or nomination of the Governor of New Zea- land ? " Compare that with the Premier's utterances at the present time! Why, if we want to go to anybody for expressions which may be inimical to organized society- for expressions which are likely to call up feelings of resentment against the ruling authorities- if we are to look for expressions antagonistic to the King or the Queen, who better can we go to than to the Premier himself? How many times has he made the welkin ring in New Zealand with the words of the song "The Wearing of the Green," -- She's the most distressful country that ever I have seen ; They 're hanging men and women for the wearing of the green. Mr. SEDDON .- You cannot sing it. Mr. PIRANI .- No, unfortunately I cannot sing it ; and I am not like the Premier-I can- not pretend to feel it one day and the reverse the next. And beyond that, take the Premier's speech to the Imperial troops in Wellington : who talks about members as enemies to or- ganized society ? The idea of a Privy Coun- cillor, the Premier of the colony, telling His Majesty's troops in public, as he did early this year, that they were underpaid, and that they had a right to have their "screws" raised ! The Premier's idea of inculcating sentiments of loyalty ! I wonder what would have been said in the Old Country if any Privy Councillor had addressed the troops there in terms like these. Why, he would have been in the guard-room in five minutes. It re- minds me very much of several expressions used by an officer of the Imperial troops when reviewing their tour through New Zea- land. In one case the officer reiterates seve- ral times how tiresome the Premier's windy speeches were to them, and he wound up his letter by saying, "We leave New Zealand, but the Government yacht is following with the Premier on board-he wants to make another speech !" And that is how those whom the Premier wished to impress with his Imperial views and with his earnestness in the cause of the Empire treated the communications the Premier made to them. I say this : that, so far as those who are opposed to this Bill are concerned, it is not a question of loyalty, or of the maintenance of organized society, for there 
<page>248</page>
disorganize society than the Premier himself ; and it is not to his opponents, it is not to those who want to be careful about the finances of the colony, who want to be careful about the reputation and position of the Governor, who want to be careful that Parliament itself does not infringe on the lines of demarcation be- tween genuine loyalty and the Ministry of the day-it is the Premier himself who has done more in that respect to bring the representa- tive of the King in this colony into disrepute than any of those who have opposed the grants which have been made to him. Any honourable member who studies our estimates for the last few years, and the grants on those estimates to Vice-Royalty in this colony-grants which are really against the conditions made with the Governor when he came out to the colony-will find that the Premier has done more by those money grants to disorganize society than anything that has been yet done in connection with this subject. Personally, the Premier himself is more to blame for the free discussion which has taken place on this measure-for the open discussion-than all the rest of the members put together; and he ought to be the last to twit members because they have given expression to their honest opinions-he ought to be the last to twit them with being practically anarchists-the 8.30. expression the Premier meant to have used. But he is not always as bold as he is thought to be. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- Sir, I am rather pleased to-night at the manner the Bill has  been received and dealt with. If any one had told me that at half-past eight o'clock I should be replying on the third reading of this Bill I would not have believed them. But if any one had said that I should be here replying to it at half-past eight to-morrow morning, I should have said " Most likely." Sir, what a wonderful change for the better ! Listen to the speeches of the three members who have spoken to-night on the Bill-what a contrast as compared with the speeches that they delivered when the Bill was before the House for its second reading. How much better would it have been, how much more to their credit, if they on that occasion had calmly and dispassionately spoken upon the question, purely on constitutional or financial grounds, and on those grounds had objected to it? Sir, that would not have pained me : it was their attack upon the King's representative that hurt me. I should have no feeling whatever if members purely on finan- cial or constitutional grounds objected to the expenditure ; but when I hear members con- tending that this colony should repudiate, and that that repudiation should be in respect of authorised expenditure that has taken place by the King's representative, it is not to be won- dered at that, under these circumstances, I should feel pained and give expression to my feelings as I did, and as, I think, I was fully justi- fied in doing. An Hon. MEMBER .- It was not authorised. Mr. SEDDON .- Now, how is it, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Pirani Courts, where they would have to behave them- selves, and would not be allowed to interrupt, should repeatedly interrupt me when I am speaking ? Mr. ATKINSON .- They imitate you. Mr. SEDDON .- The honourable member will have to live a long time and change consider- ably for the better before he is able to do that. At all events, I am not to be thrown off my discourse. I say, Sir, there is a change in this respect, comparing what they have said this evening and what they said on the second reading of the Bill : then the attack was on the representative of the King. To-night, Sir, the attack is upon myself, and I say that is a very agreeable change, because I am here to defend myself, which the King's representative can- not do. Mr. FISHER .- You are here to defend him. Mr. SEDDON. - Is that the reason, then? Is that the reason members of the House should attack His Excellency for the purpose of causing me to defend him ? Is it to be done for that reason, and for no other purpose ? Sir, I hope that that will never be considered the proper thing to do in this House. If it is considered the right thing to do for the pur- pose of provoking a defence -that such at- tacks should take place -then I was justified in what I said, that contrasted with previous Par- liaments there was a decadence in respect of the present Parliament. Sir, I say, respecting the debate of the other night, that when members take the proofs of some of the speeches delivered the other evening, and read in Hansard the cor- rected speeches, they will probably find correc- tions of a very extensive character ; but, whilst it is to the credit of those who have eliminated passages from their speeches that those passages should be eliminated, it was not in the interests of those members or the interests of this House that those remarks should ever have been made, and there was nothing to provoke the acrimo- nious debate that took place. As some of the members remarked, in moving the second read- ing of the Bill my remarks seemed to be laboured. It is true I was very careful in what I said ; and why was I careful ? I did not wish to say a single word that would provoke debate or hostility. I did not wish to say a single word to which exception could be taken. I wished this House to be dignified. I desired that this House should show the people our action on an occasion of this kind when called upon to pass a Bill of an unusual character which had been called forth because we had entertained our future King and Queen, who had been our invited guests. As the Governor, the King's representative, had to take the part of host for the colony, and had taken that part at our in- vitation and express wish, and having incurred these liabilities and disbursed these moneys, perforce he must be reimbursed, because we had, through His Excellency, assured the British Government that New Zealand would defray the whole of the cost of entertaining the Royal visitors. I therefore say I was careful in my re- marks ; but I say again, what did those honour- 
<page>249</page>
gave particulars. Why did I give particulars ? Because there was an undercurrent going on that had reached me, to the effect that there had been extravagance, and that the amount in the Bill under the circumstances was excessive, and I wished to show by giving these items that it was not all incurred purely for enter- taining at the Government Houses of Auckland and Wellington, but that there were other ex- penses included, which under ordinary circum- stances would be charged against furnishing the unofficial portions of the Government House at Wellington and the Government House at Auckland, and those items came to some hun- dreds of pounds. I mentioned that for the pur- pose of taking away objections that I thought would be raised to the amount that was men- tioned in the Bill, and because I did that I was toid by one member I had degraded the House, and that I had lowered the tone of the debate. I always understood that when members sought information it was right and consistent with our dignity that we should give it to them. I thought I could give these items to them ; and I say it was unjust and unfair that it should be suggested that extravagance had taken place when members had not asked and were not aware what the money had been spent on. That is unfair criticism, and is not usual with members representing an intelli- gent people like New Zealand. I admit I was cautious, and for the reason that I have stated. Then, Sir, another reason. Why was the Bill brought down? The member for Wellington City has given us as his reason for speaking  that I said representations were made to me by him in respect to withdrawing the item from the estimates. Now, Sir, if anything I said would even infer that, the inference would be   wrong. The honourable member never spoke to me. I never said he had done so ; but what I said, and I repeat it, was this : it was repre- sented to me that if I withdrew the item from the estimates and put the amount in a Bill, that that would do away with the objections on the constitutional point being raised as to whether His Excellency could sign the Appro- priation Bill, and it would disarm to a great extent hostile criticism that otherwise would take place, and for peace' sake, and so that there should not be this adverse criticism, and to prevent the name of the King's representative being bandied about on the floor of the House, I withdrew it from the estimates. And after that was done, what was said ? I had fallen in, et cetera, and that it would enable greater latitude and opportunity of speaking on the second reading, an opportunity of having to give full particulars in Committee, and that on the third reading the Government would know all about it. It almost makes one feel inclined never to give way in any case-never to care what representations are made ; and if, later, when requests are made I refuse them, it will be because I fear that underlying there may be something detrimental. The majority of the members will understand, after one had done his best to meet the few that were ob- took place, that one would naturally feel sore at being treated in the course the debate took, not only as to the representative of the King but to myself, for both of us were unfairly and unjustly treated. Will members say that no offensive references were made? Did not the member for the Wairarapa say that he had been invited to Government House, but, said he, "I never put my feet under His Excel- lengy's mahogany "? What sort of spirit is that? If the hospitality of the King's representative has been offered to an honour- able member, is it a proper way to show loyalty to parade the refusal of that proffered hospitality ? I believe all the honourable gentleman has said as to his loyalty, but I say actions speak more loudly and strongly than words, and it is not the action of a loyal person to refuse invitation after invitation. That is not what I understand as being con- sistent with good manners and the rules of organized society. I have been accused of using rather strong language. I do not believe in strong language; I only use it when it is absolutely necessary : just as your medical adviser gives you a strong mixture, when something mild and palatable would be of little use for remedial purposes. There was every reason for strong language the other evening. But I do take exception when the member for Palmerston or the member for Wairarapa takes me to task for using strong language. I am quoting now from the " black book "- from a speech that was delivered by Mr. Hornsby. He says :- "A whole fortnight had been consumed in discussing what was first of all called the ' Marine scandal,' but what had since come to be called the 'Marine conspiracy,' set on foot by Mr. Pirani, Captain von Schoen, and others, to get at Ministers, and, if possible, belittle them and injure them in the eyes of the people. They had failed. (Applause). Mr. Pirani had posed as a purist, but he was now proved a political mouchard, a political eavesdropper, a political keyhole and a door- jamb 'conspirator.' That little man got in- formation from heads of departments, and then rushed into the House to use it against Ministers." Mr. HORNSBY .- That is not there. Mr. SEDDON .- I will lay this paper on the table of the House. It is an address delivered by Mr. J. T. M. Hornsby at Carterton in 1899. Mr. HORNSBY .- Read it all. Mr. SEDDON .- The honourable gentleman takes exception to my statement when I simply used the words "that the views held by some of the members of the House were inimical to organized society," and yet, speaking in respect to the member for Palmerston, he calls him a conspirator. Mr. PIRANI. - That was before he was elected. Mr. SEDDON .- And I presume. per se, it was by using this language he succeeded in getting elected. Then let me go a little further. The 
<page>250</page>
tion to terms I used-terms I often use-and terms that, I am glad to say, are used by others in this colony when mention is made of the grand old flag. Well, I was taught to respect it from my boyhood. I do respect that dear old flag. Sir, I will do my best, and I have always done my best, to uphold that grand old flag ; and because I apply that term to it the honourable member, in the refined language for which he is so noted, says it is a display of flunkeyism. He takes exception to my loyalty and terms of endearment. He says that my references to the dear old Mother-land and to our grand old flag are evidence of flunkeyism ; and that, perforce, I would point out, comes . from the honourable gentleman who a few minutes before had been boasting of his loyalty. Sir, the honourable member also told us about this criticism of the expenditure. The honour- able member's speech was a carefully prepared speech, and went far apart and away from finance ; and during that speech, as well as during the debate, what subject was brought up? That we refunded to His Excellency the Governor £300 remission of Customs duties paid by His Excellency-upon what ? Mr. HORNSBY .- I never referred to that. Mr. SEDDON .- It was referred to during the debate. Now, I say that when that vote was before the House, and the money was passed, was the proper time to say anything for or against it. Why should it be raked up now, and during the debate on the second reading of this Bill, unless for the purpose of discrediting His Excellency's advisers, and His Excellency  the Governor, the King's representative in this colony ? The refund, principally, was upon articles which, I believe, were articles of silver, belonging to His Excellency. They were to be used during his term of office in this colony, and it is not unusual that silver that is to be used for the service of this colony should be allowed to come in duty free. We allow the Admiral, and the captains of His Majesty's warships that come to these shores, to import similar articles duty free. In such cases the Customs duties are not collectable ; in other words, these officers take anything they like out of bond without paying duties at all, and it was not at that time, and in respect to the goods upon which duty had been paid, unreason- able to put His Excellency the Governor on the same footing. I say, Sir, that there was no justification at all for raking that matter up on this measure. Then, again, the member for Wellington City (Mr. Atkinson), or some other member-I probably had better not mention names-referred to the question of a vote of £1,000, another vote taken, they stated, in con- nection with His Excellency. But what was that for ? That was for furnishing the additions and alterations to the Government Houses at Auck- land and Wellington. It had nothing whatever to do with His Excellency : and yet that was dragged into the debate. And then the $2,000, the $300, and the $1,000 were added to the $7,000 of salary, and the member for Wairarapa stands up here in the House and says, "There Mr. Seddon going to pass this money." I say that the increased salary given to His Excellency the Governor was not passed last year because we knew there would be extra expense in connec- tion with the Royal visit. Why should that be brought up now ? The Governor's Salary and Allowances Act was passed because we con- sidered that the expense now entailed upon the King's representative is greater than it was in years gone by, and because the country can better pay it now than it could at the time when Sir Harry Atkinson reduced the salary from £7,000 to £5,000. We are only restoring it to what it stood at before. Again, I ask the question of those loyal subjects of His Majesty who are brimming over with loyalty to-night, Why do they bring that up now, and why do they object to a refund of the £2,250 reimburse- ments and expenses to the King's representa- tive? There is no answer to it. Now, 1 must have a little chaff with my friend the member for Wairarapa. I think he is taking things a little too serious. The honourable gentleman the other night, when I made the statement that he has criticized-that the views held by him were not in accordance with those of the good people of Wairarapa -- he questioned my statement, and he challenged me to go up to the Wairarapa. I said I would oblige him. I have always had a hearty reception from the good folks of the Wairarapa, and I undertake to say, whenever I go there-whether it is to meet the honourable gentleman or on any other occasion - I shall receive a hearty and cordial welcome, even from those who differ from me. They are always glad to see me and give me a welcome. Now, the honourable gentleman has challenged me again. He has challenged me to go on the platform with him. Sir, I have to be careful of the company I keep, and with whom I go upon the platform. We have been on the platform before together. Now, Sir, it takes two to make a quarrel. The honourable member was very much excited the other night, and he has not yet settled down to his normal condition. When he has assumed a normal condition, if he then invites me to go to the Wairarapa, I will consider it. Members might have noticed that I almost turned pale when he said that if I went up there and the result was that the meeting decided that the honourable member was in error, he would tender his resignation. Mr. HORNSBY .- The very next day. Mr. SEDDON .- Is that not a very good reason why I should not go ? Mr. Buchanan's friends would attend and pack the meeting, and there would, of course, be some of my friends who would like to see the Liberal leader upheld in his position, and that com- bination would carry a resolution to the effect that the honourable member's views were not in accordance with those of the people of the Wairarapa. He would tender his resignation, and then, of course, we should have Mr. Buchanan coming back into the House. Well, I am not going to do anything to promote Mr. Buchanan's coming back. I had quite enough of him when he was here ; 
<page>251</page>
had with my worthy friend - for I still call him so -- I prefer the present representative, who, as far as the district is concerned, has done more for that district in the short time he has repre- sented it than Mr. Buchanan did during the whole ten years he was here. In the interests of the district, therefore, and its representation in the House, I must decline to meet my friend under these circumstances, or do anything that would result in his resignation. Then, Sir, - I have only got five minutes' time left,-what is raked up now? Not the wretched past. I have been called to account for not being loyal in that I had voted for an elective Governor. Ah, ha! Sir, the honourable member only quoted a certain portion of the speech I made on that occasion. But what were my open- ing remarks ?- " If I thought for a moment that the fact of the people of New Zealand, claiming their undoubted right under the Constitution Act to eleet their own Governor, meant the separating of us from the Home-country and our beloved Queen, I should be very sorry that we should take such a course, for I claim, myself, to be a New-Zealander, and as loyal a subject as any in Her Majesty's dominions." Those are my opening remarks. I then went on to say, and I repeat it : -- " History tells us that in the early days of the colonization of America there were people then guiding the British nation who held it to be criminal on the part of the colonists of America that they should manufacture so much  as a horse shoe or a hobnail. If such an argu- ment as that were used -that it was wrong on the part of the people of the colony to manufac- tore articles for themselves, the people using such an argument might also apply it to the case of a colony which chose to elect its own Governor, and might say that the colony could no longer be recognised as an integral portion of the British Empire. I believe this colony is capable of electing a person quite competent to represent British interests here and at the same time to conserve the rights of the people of New Zealand. It is a slur on the people of New Zealand to say they are not capable of electing their own Governor." And, Sir, I was glad, in supporting that Election of Governor Bill, to be standing shoulder to shoulder with Sir George Grey, and I then believed, and I still believe, that to have passed that Act, and to have had him elected our Governor, we were paying a tribute to the greatest statesman that has ever been in the colony. There is, Sir, my answer to that. Time will not permit me to go further than to say this: I believe that the House will now pass this Bill by a large majority - I hope almost unanimously. It would have been well if it had been passed without debate at all. We gave a reception unsurpassed, I be- Heve, in the British colonies to their Royal Highnesses, and they went away from New Zealand delighted with its people and with our country. There are those who are watching carefully what is going on, and they will seize said during the second reading and third read- ing debate on this Bill, and they will say that it was all hollow, that underneath there was disaffection, that there were those who did not desire to tender to our future King and Queen that hospitality and devotion to which they were entitled. I repeat, Sir, the people of New Zealand are a loyal people, and I say the people of New Zealand gave a hearty and a cordial welcome ; but, at the same time, I do say there are some members in this House who, by what they have said under circumstances probably that they will regret, have detracted from that which was done in accordance with the wishes of the people of this country; and if I have been pained under such circumstances-if I have said anything, Sir, to which exception is taken -members will understand that I only did it from a sense of duty, believing it to be in the best interests of the House, and in the best interests of the colony. I hope to see this Bill carried through the third reading without a division at all. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City). 9.0 -I wish to make a personal explana- tion. The Right Hon. the Premier has stated - or, at any rate, insinuated-that I and other members of the House who spoke as I did on the second reading of the Bill have been so ashamed of what we said in that debate that we have garbled the Hansard proofs of what we then said. I desire to say that, so far as I am concerned, I have not eliminated or softened a single word or syllable that I found upon my Hansard proof. On the contrary, I found it necessary to put in a good deal of fairly strong matter which the reporter had unfortunately omitted. I can only speak for myself, but I hope other honourable members concerned will get up after me and repudiate the insinuation as I have done. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) .- As a personal explanation, I wish to say, ditto. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) .- As a personal explanation I wish to say that, so far as I am concerned, I did not alter in any way, or in any material sense whatever, any words spoken by me in the debate on the second reading. I have here the rough Hansard proof, and I will show it to any members of this House who want to see it, so that they may see whether there is the slightest alteration in the remarks I made on the second reading of the Bill. Sir, it is all here, and I do not take a single sentence of it back - not even the quotation from Hans Breitmann's poem. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City). - I desire, Sir, to say much the same thing, and would like to say this : That the Premier has, by the state- ment he made, laid himself open to this rising up of every member who spoke on the debate the other night to deny the imputation that he has garbled or materially altered his Han- sard proof. And I should like to ask how it is that the Premier or any member of the House can look over the proofs of another member and ascertain that they have been altered. 
<page>252</page>
stand the Premier to say he had seen another member's proof. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) .- I de- sire to say, in personal explanation, that if I had made a speech which the Premier assumed I had when he was addressing me, I would not have altered it in the slightest. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) .- I merely wish to repudiate any part of the honourable gentleman's innuendo which may apply to me. I still think it was an unpardonable blunder on the part of the Ministry to intro- duce such a Bill. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- Sir, in reply, to show that I have not been at all wrong in my statement, the honourable member for Welling- ton City (Mr. Atkinson) admits that the Han- sard reporter left out some very strong matter, and that he himself on receipt of his proofs had put it in. That shows that the Hansard reporter felt ashamed, shall I say, of what the honourabie member had said, and did not re- port it. Mr. PIRANI .- I rise to a point of order. Is the Premier in order in making another speech ? Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER said the Premier was entitled to explain if he had been mis- understood. Mr. SEDDON .- The member for Palmers- ton, the member for Wellington City (Mr. Atkinson), the member for Wairarapa, the member for Dunedin City (Mr. Barclay), the member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher), and the member for Wellington City (Mr. Hutche- son), all rose up and made their own explana- tions. I did not interrupt, and I did not rise to any point of order, and it shows how unfairly these gentlemen would deal with me when I rise to put myself right. I again say that the mem- ber for Wellington City said that I said that he had garbled his speech. I never used those words at all, and the honourable member will find that when he looks at my uncorrected proof. I never applied those words to what the honourable member had done. The honour- able member admits himself there were con- siderable alterations, because he said there was very strong terms left out which the Hansard reporter had not reported-I suppose he said it in the heat of the moment-that he never intended to say it -- so that the honourable member is completely giving himself away. And as to what other members have said- namely, that they made no alterations in their Hansard proofs -I have come to the conclu- sion that the Hansard reporters must have dealt with them as they dealt with the mem- ber for Wellington City (Mr. Atkinson), and refrained from reporting those strong terms used by honourable gentlemen and applied to the action of His Excellency the Governor. Mr. ATKINSON (Wellington City) .- I should like to be allowed to explain what the omission was in my Hansard proof, and the omission which I supplied in correcting the proof. I said that the arguments of certain honourable members were taking us back to the Stuart and to do whatever it was told to do by the Sove- reign. I said, further, there was this difference between our times and those: namely, that in those times the Sovereign could hit back effectively, but here the Sovereign's representa- tive was, unfortunately, helpless. Perhaps it is that the names "Stuart " and "Tudor " were not so familiar to the reporter as the names " Russell " and " Seddon," and that might be the explanation of their omission from the Hansard proof. That was the only substantial omission I had to supply. Mr. SEDDON .- I accept the honourable gentleman's explanation and apology. The House divided. AYES, 38. Palmer Allen, E. G. Hall-Jones Heke Parata Bennet Herries Buddo Russell, G. W. Carroll Hogg Seddon Houston Steward Collins Lawry Thompson, R. Colvin Thomson, J. W. Duncan McGowan Field Ward McGuire McLachlan Flatman Wilford Fowlds McNab Witheford. Fraser, A. L. D. Mills Tellers. Fraser, W. Napier Carncross Hall O'Meara Stevens. NOES, 21. Hornsby Millar Allen, J. Monk Hutcheson Arnold Bollard Pirani Lang Laurenson Ell Tanner. Fisher Massey Tellers. Mackenzie, T. Atkinson Graham Hanan Meredith Barclay. Hardy Majority for, 17. Bill read a third time. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- Sir, I want to amend the title, by striking out the words "expenses incurred," and inserting in lieu thereof the words "liabilities incurred and moneys disbursed." Motion agreed to, and Bill passed. MAORI RELICS BILL. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister). - This is a Bill the necessity for which has been urged by several who take an interest in the preserva- tion of Maori relics and antiquities, and it is matter for congratulation that there are so many in the colony who share equally in the deep concern that is taken on this particular subject. In looking up such data as is pro- vided by other countries with respect to the establishment of museums for the preservation of art and literature peculiar to those coun- tries I have found very little to go upon. The chief items of information I have been able to gather have been through the reports of Lord Cromer to the Imperial Government on " Egypt- ology " in 1897 and 1898, and there he shows the large amount of interest that is taken in that country in the building of museums, 
<page>253</page>
antiquities, and archaeological matters of in- terest to the people and in connection with the people of the country. I find there, also, that they are very liberal in the expendi- ture of money for such purposes. They have passed a law which has for its object the retention in the country of all relics and other matters already mentioned. This law is applicable both to Europeans and native residents of that country, and they prohibit through the Customs the exportation of any- thing of the kind. That is to say, any one going into Egypt to buy up curios and works of art such as he would wish to take away, and such as are being taken away every day from this colony by visitors, would find that he was un- able to do so because of the restrictions placed thereupon by Act. We propose, Sir, in this country to follow on the same lines, and give effect to the general interest, which has now assumed national proportions, by complying with the wishes of the people of this colony, and have some measure on the statute-book which will assist us and our societies in con- serving to this land what properly belongs to it. The State, I am glad to say, views with favour all the suggestions that have been made in this particular direction, and it is for this purpose that this Bill is now brought forward. I take this occa- sion for specially thanking many eminent gentlemen in New Zealand for the services and assistance they have given in promoting the ohject in view-notably Mr. Percy Smith,  Mr. Hamilton, and other leading members of scientific bodies which have for their duties and functions the carrying-out of work akin to what is proposed here. My opinion is that we ought to establish a State museum, and it should be in Wellington, being the most central part of the colony and the seat of Government. I think the most suitable site for the purpose would be the Parliamentary Grounds, at the back of the buildings, used at present for lawn There would be nothing gained by tennis. passing this Bill if we had no building wherein to preserve, catalogue, and arrange our collec- tions. I think the colony should put up a substantial building for the purpose, fireproof and of ample size. In that building we should have collected all the relics it is possible to collect, and all articles of historical value, carvings, and the works of art of past genera- tions. I am certain that the Native race would fall in with this view, and would assist in filling the museum by making valuable contributions from their own repositories. I am certain the leading people amongst the Natives would look upon a national museum in the light of a place wherein they could store their family heirlooms -those which they would not part with for any monetary value. Space could be provided wherein each leading family could store their heirlooms in such a museum for all time. Then, it would be necessary to establish some system for the proper cataloguing of whatever is col- lected in the museum. For this purpose we should have expert men to form a central and men in the various districts to undertake collec- tions from their various localities ; and by a properly carried out system we could get good results though late in the day. I admit the time is rather late for setting about a work of this kind, but there is still sufficient material left in the country to make a very good collec- tion with the assistance of the Natives. In connection with this we are also encouraging another branch of scientific research which is allied and associated with the one dealt with in this Bill. I refer to the literature and historical records of the Maori race. A portion of the museum could be set apart as a library for Maori history, records, and literature particularly affecting the race. Then you will have stored under one roof the his- tory of the records, traditions, laws, mystics, and economics of the Maori, together with illustrations of their handicraft and art, as represented by their carvings and manufac- ture of garments and implements, agricul- tural and otherwise. This Bill proposes to restrict the exportation of Maori relics from the colony, as we have reason to believe and know that many valuable articles are carried away by visitors who have the money to secure them. By regulations we will have to provide the necessary machinery to give effect to that. The Bill also declares that the Government -- the State-should have the first right to pur- chase any collection, or any work of art or col- lection, in the colony. Of course, on the State declining, if it did' so, the owners of such treasures should alienate them in any way they liked. It might be felt by honourable members that the measure goes too far, and I know that in certain quarters objection has. been voiced in respect to what are considered the drastic proposals of this Bill. It is said that it will interfere with an industry that is being carried on in certain localities. For instance, in Auckland there are one or two. there who have made it a business to collect the most valuable articles they can get hold of. In many instances collectors are moved by purely patriotic motives. For years some have been engaged in this calling as a trade, and they sell to those who visit the country and desire to take away curios with them. Well, it will be rather hard to interfere with any one so engaged,. and it is not the intention of the Government to be so hard on them. If the Bill contains anything that will press severely on such occu- pations, I will be quite prepared to receive suggestions from honourable gentlemen with the view of modifying the measure whenever it may be necessary. The main object of the Government is to place the State in such a position that it will have the first right to buy what it may consider necessary or of importance to the State, and what should be stored up in a national museum. The State will be quite prepared to pay a reasonable price for any- thing it requires in that behalf; but after the State has exercised that right it should no longer interfere with those who carry on the business of collecting these articles and 
<page>254</page>
very extensive one, and in the few remarks I have made in moving the second reading I think I have touched upon the main points. am sure honourable members will feel with me that some such measure is necessary ; that it is about time a national museum was esta- blished in this colony; that steps should be taken by the State to collect all articles of value, such as carvings, works of art, and historic relics of the Maori race; and that the State should have the first right to secure such valuables. I ask the assistance of the House to amend the Bill if necessary-to modify it, or to strengthen it-so that we may gain our object without committing any injustice on curio dealers or collectors of Maori art on modern Sir, I move the second reading of the lines. Bill. Mr. FOWLDS (Auckland City) .- I 9.30. have nothing at all to say against the principle contained in the Bill, and I should have been glad to have seen the measure enacted years ago, as I believe it would have been of great advantage to this country. I believe if this Bill, when passed, is adminis- tered in the spirit and in the direction indi- cated by the mover it will prove to be a most beneficial measure. I have no doubt it can be so administered without undue hardship. But I want just to emphasize one point touched on in regard to those people who have already made large collections for the purposes of busi- ness. After the State has had a fair and reasonable opportunity of purchasing the relics  and curios that have been so collected, I hope it will not place any unreasonable restrictions in the way of these people disposing of them to those who care to buy. There are in various parts of the colony very large collections that have been made for the purpose of supplying the wants of tourists, and it clearly would be an injustice to prevent those people disposing of them in the best market after the Government had declined to purchase them at prices which they are willing to accept from all and sundry. It would be a great hardship to those people to have these things tied up in their hands, so that they could not dispose of them to anybody. Then, there is another point that requires to be borne in mind, more espe- cially in regard to the administration of the Act. It is a wise thing to encourage the Maoris in the production of works of art and curios of all the different kinds. It is good for them, and it would be quite an industry, as it is now, to some extent, in the country ; and if this Act were drastically administered it might put a stop very largely to the possibilities of dealing in such articles, and consequently in their produc- tion, because the State would not be in a posi- tion and would not care to fill a museum with replicas. While the Act is right in principle, and while I think it ought to have been brought into operation years ago, I believe the whole success or failure of it, and the good or the harm that it will do, will largely depend on the way it is administered. But the remarks made by the mover were quite satisfactory to me on Mr. Carroll by future Administrators, I have no doubt the Act will work smoothly, and will be of benefit to the colony. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) .- I have to congratulate the honourable gentleman who introduced this Bill. I think it is distinctly a step in the right direction, and it comes with a particularly good grace, emanating, as it does, from a gentleman who can lay claim to the proud honour of having in his veins the blood of the Native race of this country. I congratu- late the honourable gentleman upon having in- troduced such a measure. I consider the Bill, although it may in some respects require modi- fication to meet the views of the honourable member for Auckland City (Mr. Fowlds), can be made perfectly workable, as its primary object is to preserve the history of the Native race as contained in its carvings. We know that dealers have been perambulating from one end of the colony to the other buying up all the works of art and curios they can secure, and tourists from other countries have bought them and distributed them throughout the world. I know that in the Old Land some of these works are greatly prized, but in other places they are thrown into a corner of a building and never looked at again. The honourable member for Auckland City (Mr. Fowlds) said that this Bill, if not properly administered, might interfere with the de- velopment of Maori art amongst the Natives. I do not think that will happen, because, if the Minister who is in charge of this Bill will adopt the method that prevails in Egypt, it will not in the least degree interfere with the sale of works which are not required by the colony itself. In Egypt all their art treasures, I understand, pass through the Boulak Museum, and it is from that museum that tourists purchase what they require; and they are able to purchase the articles at a reasonable price. Of course, there is nothing made there now; but, if there were any of these beautiful carvings that were not re- quired here, visitors might be able to obtain them at this proposed New Zealand museum, and probably on more reasonable terms than at present prevail. Of course, there is little legis- lation bearing on the subject to be found any- where. In Italy they safeguard the works of art to a considerable extent, but the laws that are to be found there are in their criminal code law and in their amendments, which would not be applicable to this country. If this Bill goes through the House, it should contain the pro- vision that all works of art should first be offered to the Government; and, in the second place, that the Government sanction should be first obtained before any are permitted to leave the colony. First of all, the Government will have the option of purchase, and will sanction the exportation of them afterwards ; and if that is insisted on in this measure, then a very great step will have been taken. Some- thing might also be done in connection with the discovery of works of art. I think if treasures are found in caves on private property some allowance might be made to the people owning 
<page>255</page>
a reasonable consideration is given to the dis- coverers, they ought to be considered Crown property. Of course, there are those who have collections of these valuable articles, and Mr. Craig, in Auckland, has some beautiful carvings that probably are two hundred years old ; and I believe it is a description of art that is now un- known. In fact, I have paid no less than 11s. for a small photograph of one of these carvings. I think it is essential this Bill should go through quickly, in order that the Government should get into its possession all these very magnifi- cent works. Another thing that may be done in connection with securing New Zealand works of art, I think, is that the Agent-General might be empowered to secure at auction sales in the Old Country many articles that are there offered for sale. When I was in England I heard of a valuable collection that was likely to be sold soon. It was contained in a little seaport town on the west coast of Cumberland, and I went to see these articles. The majority of them must have been there over seventy years, and I never saw more beautiful speci. mens of New Zealand greenstone implements and carvings than I found in the little sea- port town called Whitehaven. Very frequently sales occur in auction-rooms near Covent Gar- den Market, and I have frequently seen such articles disposed of there at exceedingly low prices. For instance, I lost an opportunity of securing a moa's egg, which was actually sold at #4 10s .- an egg that, if I had been in the room when it was sold, I would willingly have  given $50 for. Mr. HERRIES. - Was it damaged ? Mr. T. MACKENZIE .- It was almost intact. So that, now the Minister has taken this matter up. I hope he will place a sum in the hands of the Agent-General with instructions to look up any Maori works of art that may at any time be offered for sale in England. I thoroughly agree with the honourable gentleman in his ideas about establishing a museum. I think a very excellent plan has been prepared by Mr. Hamil- ton, whose name ought to be most honourably associated with this subject. I believe he is the chief promoter of it in this colony, and there is no more competent person to suggest ideas to the Minister. I do heartily congratu- late the Minister on the step he has taken. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) .-- As I repre- sent one of the chief tourist districts of the colony, I think it only right that I should say something on this Bill. I join with others in the congratulations offered to the Hon. the Minis- ter for introducing the Bill, and it is none too soon. That valuable treasures have gone out of the colony every one will admit, and steps ought to be taken to stop them, so far as pos- sible. And I am quite with him in the establish- ing of a colonial museum ; but I regret to see, on looking through the estimates, that I find no sum down for a colonial museum, and I trust on the supplementary estimates a sum will be found, because I hold this museum is a natural enrollary to this Bill, because if any one has any curio they wish to offer for sale the Government | the price that was asked for it. Now, I could not buy it unless they have a place to store it, and consequently it would be detained in the colony at the expense of the person who has it. But I must say, in the interests of the tourists, that I am bound to criticize this Bill, as I think it is far too drastic in its provisions. Now, Sir, it does not only include Maori relics, but it also includes, as the interpretation clause says, "any article of historical or scientific value or interest relating to New Zealand." Well, Sir, that is a very wide term. It may cover almost anything that the tourists buy in the colony. The Bill also does not apply only to tourists : it applies to any individual leaving the colony to go Home, even if he has been born in the colony. And it will also apply to any works of art they may have got the Natives to make for them and paid for out of their own pocket. They will not be able to take them out of the colony unless they offer them to the Government first. Now, for instance, we have all seen the beautiful carved pataka in Lord Ranfurly's drawing-room, which, I believe, is a modern work, and made for and paid for by him ; and we have also seen other patakas, walking sticks, bowls, et cetera, carved by the Natives at the present day. Well, under this Bill the people who have ordered them would not be enabled to take them Home, if they desired to do so, without first offering them to the Government. Also, as the Hon. the Minister knows perfectly well, the Maoris often make presents to pakchas they like-not always very valuable ones-and people might like to take them away as connected with some Maori they know, or for other associations; and vet if they were going to the Old Country they would have to offer them for sale to the Govern- ment. And under the 4th clause, which seems to me altogether too drastic, the Government, if they decline to purchase, can also lay an embargo on them going out of the country. It seems to me that it is possible that this clause might be used as a way of unfairly reducing the price. Now, for instance, there was a specimen of the Notornis mantelli caught about a year ago somewhere about the Sounds, and I understand the Government would not give the price that was asked, and I think it was secured by the Dunedin Museum eventually. Mr. McNAB .- It was secured by the Govern- ment and deposited in the Museum. Mr. HERRIES. -- Well, I think the man wanted £200 for it, and it was secured for $150. Now, supposing a foreign museum had offered, say, $400 for it, would it not be right for the Government to give that man the sum of money that it would be worth to another insti- tution ? They could under this Act say, "No; we shall not purchase at the price you want, or that other people have offered you, but we will not let you take it out of the country, and therefore you have to come down to our price." I do not say that will be done, but it would be quite possible by this clause, unless it is amended, that it could be made the means of endeavouring to reduce the price of a thing which was honestly worth 
<page>256</page>
that it applies to everything that a tourist who comes round wants to take with him ; and I think it is a good thing they are allowed to buy what they want, so long as the curios are not of any great value to the colony. Still, if this Bill is carried out as it is it would entirely stop this, because any Customs officer might stop an article when a passenger was leaving ; and, anyhow, they would have to write down to the Governor in Council to see if the colony wished to purchase it. There may be such things as a small carved paddle, or small mat, or walking-sticks, which tourists often buy, and they will have to write down to the Govern- ment or go through some red-tape process to know if the Government want to purchase it before they can take it away from the colony. I say that would be putting the tourists to a lot of inconvenience which they should not be sub- jected to. There is no reason why these small things, which are of no practical value to the colony, should be subject to the provisions of this Bill. But I would like to see the Bill amended in some way so as to make it apply really to important things, leaving the ordinary small curious in just the same position as they are now. An Hon. MEMBER .- That is the intention. Mr. HERRIES .- "That is the intention"; but what I complain of is that the Bill goes much further than is the intention of the honourable member. An Hon. MEMBER .- One word in clause 4 would put it right.  Mr. HERRIES. - Yes, it may be amended in Committee; but the Bill as it stands would affect the tourist traffic in a serious degree. An Hon. MEMBER .- It is all to be left to the regulations. Mr. HERRIES. - The regulations have to receive the approval of the Governor in Council only, and are not submitted to the House. There is a more serious matter, however, and that was mentioned by the member for Auck- land City (Mr. Fowlds), and that is that it might put a stop to a very good habit which exists amongst the Natives of executing carv- ings, which habit should be encouraged to the utmost possible degree ; and great credit is due to Mr. Nelson, of Whakarewarewa, in getting the modern part of his fine house carved. We should encourage the production of copies of the old carvings, and unless you have tourists who are able to buy these things the Natives naturally will not carve them. The same remark applies to mats. It would be a great thing to get the Maori women to weave the beautiful mats which they used to weave ; but what is the use of them doing so unless they can get a market for them ? If the tourist is not allowed to take them out of the colony except by going through a lot of red-tape, I say that the market will be closed, and that will be a matter of some concern to the colony. I do not offer these criticisms in a captious spirit. I do not oppose the principle of the Bill ; we all agree with the principle of the Bill : but I think some provision should be made so that the small Mr. Herries under the provisions of the measure. I agree that all important curios-curios of historic value, meres, carvings of whares, and other things -should be kept in the colony. I would, how- ever, ask the Minister if he cannot in Com- mittee devise some amendment which would minimise the objectionable parts of the Bill to. which I have alluded. Mr. NAPIER (Auckland City). - I also con- gratulate the honourable gentleman on having introduced this Bill; but I differ from those who have said that its provisions are too dras- tic. I do not consider that the provisions of the measure are drastic enough. I would like to see a law passed similar to that which exists in the Kingdom of Italy, under which there is an absolute prohibition against the export of any articles of archaeological or historical value or relating to the history of the country. It is our imperative duty to preserve all the memo- rials and the priceless treasures of the great Maori race, and that is what this Bill is in- tended to effect. It is not intended to inter- fere with traffic in modern productions, or the articles referred to by the member for the Bay of Plenty. Under section 7 it would be possible so to frame regulations, which the Governor in Council is empowered to make, as to pre- vent any inconvenience through a too extensive interpretation of the phrase " Maori relics." I should like to see an amendment of the Bill as far as the interpretation of " Maori relics " is concerned. Of course, the term " Maori" will embrace our fellow-subjects of the Cook Islands, which are included in the extended boundaries But the term " Maori " of New Zealand. would not include the race of islanders on the other Pacific islands, now included within the boundaries of New Zealand, and which are out- side the Cook Islands. I would urge that the museum the honourable gentleman refers to as likely to be established should include, as was the intention of the late Sir George Grey, the relics and memorials of the various races of the Pacific islands. There are endowments which have been given for the education in New Zea- land of the children of Pacific-islanders. Sir George Grey looked forward to the time when there would exist a great Pacific Federation, of which New Zealand should be the centre, and he, as Governor, made grants of land, most of which is now held by the Anglican Church, for the education of children of the Pacific- islanders. I think the memorials of the various races of the Pacific islands ought to be preserved in a national museum here. Many of the best collections have been already scattered. There was a magnificent collection of curiosities from the various islands of the Pacific in the possession of a Wellington citizen- Mr. Kohn- some years ago-a collection that. I believe, was of great historic and scientific value. I believe that collection has been seat- tered ; but there are several other collections that ought to be secured, notably in the United Kingdom. Now, with regard to the fear that has been expressed of interfering with the rights of those who have been engaged in the 
<page>257</page>
should be done. A fair price should be paid by the Government for articles of value which have been collected. It will be quite easy to deal equi- tally with those who have devoted to the col- lection of these treasures the best part of their lives : and it might be necessary to get a price fixed by arbitration, or in some other way, for such collections. But I do not think that a general policy measure of this kind, necessary in the interests of knowledge and of posterity, should be in any way fettered. I contend that at this late period in the history of the colony, when it is almost like shutting the stable- door after the steed has been stolen, half- measures will not be effective; but whatever effort we make now should be such as is likely to be attended with success. It would be of no use to leave such a wide-open door as the Bill proposes to leave, because, if we were to do so, I am satisfied that some of the greatest treasures would be lost to the colony. I will dal with the matter plainly and frankly. It will happen that Governors of the colony will in future, as they have done in the past, visit the Maori people, and the Maori people, in the exuberance of their generosity -- for they are one of the most generous peoples on the face of the earth-will bring forward their ancestral relics, their household gods, things that have been treasured for generations, and will present them to visiting Governors. Now, I say that we ought to set our faces against any Governor carrying away such presents, because he repre- sents us for the time being. He goes to the  Natives in our name, and he receives these things as the representative of the people and of the sovereign, and not as an individual. He speaks to the Maori people in an official capa-   city, and any presents which he receives ought to be given to the national museum, and ought to be retained by the colony. Now, no Ministry could resist the influence by a Governor, supposing he had many valuable presents in the nature of Maori relics, and we ought to take it out of the power of Ministers to grant permission even to the Governor of the colony to remove beyond the jurisdiction of the colony priceless relics of that kind. Then, Sir, there are many valuable articles of virtu from New Zealand in New South Wales, and also in the British Museum, and I should like to see the Government make an effort by way of exchange or in some other way to get back to the colony some of those things which the ri-ing generation of New-Zealanders have no opportunity of seeing at the present time. Our children have to go beyond their own country in order to get an adequate knowledge of the ancient Maori carvings and the artistic treasures of the noble race with which we are now living in peace in New Zealand. With regard to what has been suggested by an honourable member as to fresh discoveries of ancient relics, and posible injustice which might be done to people who made such discoveries in the future, I submit that such articles ought to be placed in the same category as treasure trove-they ought to belong to the State. The discoverer of any VOL. CXIX .- 16. rights in them ; and, while some compensation should be made for his labour and the trouble involved, I do not think anybody should be allowed to keep them as his private property. In ancient countries now the policy of the Go- vernments-even semi-civilised Governments- is to debar any articles associated with the ancient history of their peoples leaving their native soil ; and we ought to take a similar step, -and let it be a decisive one,-now, and if we do so we shall preserve for all time the artistic treasures of this ancient people. Mr. McNAB (Mataura) .- I intend to 10.30. support the Bill, and desire to con- gratulate the honourable member who moved the second reading on at last facing this im- portant question. It is three years since I first brought the matter before the House, in con- sequence of the discovery of one of those very rare birds, the Notornis mantelli, in the South Island. On that occasion I asked the Govern- ment - " Whether they will introduce legislation to prevent the continuous removal from the colony of rare and valuable specimens of Native art or workmanship, or unique objects of scientific interest peculiar to this colony, the result of which removal is to leave the colony unpro- vided, or not adequately provided, with speci- mens." While I think he has gone a great length in bringing this Bill before the House, I think when he comes to put it into practice he will find it will have to be modified in some im- portant particulars. In the first place, this should not be a measure to prevent objects of this class leaving the colony. The object of the Bill, the House ought to remember, is the establishment of a State museum complete in all respects ; and you only want restrictive legislation to enable you to get for that insti- tution the required objects. Outside of what may be required for that institution, every en- couragement should be given to collectors and Natives to gather together such objects as are not found in other parts of the world. The Hon. the Minister will find the best way in which to approach the subject is that now followed in Egypt. Whenever any one leaves that country for a foreign port he is re- quired to make a declaration that he does not take away with him any objects relat- ing to the very early history of Egypt. This Bill appears to put a limitation on the export of specimens of Native carving. I do not know of any other Legislature that seeks to go as far as that. It is only objects in connection with ancient history that we want to collect. But we can get over the point in this way: Power should be given to the Governor to make a regulation under which any Native carver can obtain a license to sell his carvings to any buyer, irrespective of the Government. You would by that means put no restriction upon the manufacture of objects of Native art or workmanship at the present time ; but all the while it would be the duty of the Custom- house officers in the colony to take care that 
<page>258</page>
were exported until the State exercised its prior right. Then, in regard to these large private collections which are to be found in different parts of the colony, it will be a very simple thing to deal with them. Sup- posing they were for sale wholly or partially, the State could. examine and ascertain by its officers what was wanted for the national museum, and, the wants of the national museum having been satisfied, they could be given a license to sell to all and sundry for exportation beyond the colony. All you have to do is to see that people leaving the colony are not taking with them to other parts of the world any objects of this nature that are not licensed for export. I referred to the case of Egypt, and I would like to refer again to it to explain to the House the strictness of the law. I have already mentioned that you cannot leave that country without declaring what articles you take with you outside the country. But they go so far there that not many years ago some of the members of the Egyptian scientific societies ascertained that there were being sold in some of the capitals of Europe great numbers of little things that must have come from some new discoveries in Egypt, and imme- diately the detectives were set to work all over Egypt to find out where the discoveries had been made. The result of the search was that it was ascertained that an Egyptian had discovered an old abandoned shaft at Dar-el- Bahari, near Thebes. He had come across a large number of the most valuable mummies ever found-an almost complete collection of the mummies of the old kings and queens of Egypt. As a result of this discovery an im- mense collection of very valuable articles were taken down to the Museum in Cairo, where they may be seen to this day. The member for Waihemo has told us-and he is correct in what he has said-that you can purchase anything you like that is not required in the great museum in Cairo and export it to any part of the world. I do not think that in this colony we would be able to buy up, as they do in Egypt, all those articles and resell them to tourists. In the meantime, with our limited resources, we could, at any rate, satisfy ourselves that we had obtained pre-emption over all articles of value, and in that way the collection in our national museum would be made as complete as possible. After a few years the restrictions on exportation need not be harshly read, he- cause the museum would have become very complete and perfect in its way, and therefore in time we could repeal the whole of the legis- lation and allow free-trade in all the articles. The great object is to buy for the national museum what we can, and to take care that the large collectors, like the Rothschilds of the Old Country, who are in a position to give any money collectors may ask, cannot come into the field and buy out of the colony, and leave no relies belonging to the country. So long as we take care that sufficient money is placed at the disposal of the Minister I do not see that there is any punishment to the private collectors. Mr. McNab should have undisturbed possession so long as they do not want to sell, and that when the time comes when they want to sell there should be a purchaser. The State will always be able to supply a purchaser, and therefore the wants of the private collectors are sufficiently protected. I would suggest, then, that when the Bill is in Committee the Minister in charge should alter clause 4 so that all articles that are not wanted by the Government should be allowed to be ex- ported without or under license, and that all people leaving the colony should be required to declare that they do not carry with them any articles prohibited from export under this statute. That being so, I do not think we can well suggest any other provisions until the Minister has brought the department into operation; and, as the result of a year of its operation, I have no doubt the directors of the institution would be able to give to this House very valuable suggestions on the lines adopted by such countries as Egypt and Italy, and the other countries where they seek to protect their own ancient monuments for their own country. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) .- Sir. it was at first my intention to oppose this Bill, but the admirable way in which the Minister in charge has introduced it has so far converted me that, so long as we are allowed to alter a few of its clauses in Committee to make them less drastic and less likely to interfere with pri- vate enterprise, I shall support it. The Minis- ter in charge has introduced the Bill in such a genial and lucid manner that I think he should be appointed Introducer of Bills for the Govern- ment. Now, I have a letter from Mr. Eric Craig, who is one of the principal dealers in these articles in Auckland. His opinion, con- tained in the letter, is this :- " If such a law is enacted and made to take effect at short notice it would be a serious and ruinous loss to me, as I have a very large stock of Maori carvings and curios that would become worthless, as colonial people will not buy. I consider curios I have bought my private pro- perty, to do as I like with, as they were bought from their private owners, the Maoris, under the present laws." I feel, Sir, that the admirable explanation given by the Native Minister has removed some of the most serious objections the Bill appeared to have at first sight. Mr. Spencer, another dealer in these relics, states that his capital is chietly invested in curios. He has been for many years building his business, and now suddenly he is to be prevented, except hy regulation under the hand of the Governor.in Council, from carrying on his lawful business. While agreeing with the proposal for the Government to secure a collection of the best. historical relies left in the colony, care should be taken that legislation does not go too far and cripple those who are engaged in the trade, such as the Native carvers at Rotorua. However, all that is required now, as far as I can see, to settle the question is a grant of $50,000 to enable the Native Minister to buy the different relies required from the different tribes. It is 
<page>259</page>
impossible without money to carry the opera- tions of this Bill into effect. An Hon. MENBER .- You want the building first. Mr. WITHEFORD. - I suppose $50,000 would buy the relics, and the building, of course, would be a secondary consideration. At present the question is chiefly a sentimental one. It is not a business question, except in so far as it is one of those measures which tend to interfere with private enterprise and restrict business operations. And, looking at it from that aspect, I must confess I do not like the Bill. But, when the Minister in charge tells us he will be glad to moderate the clauses so that they shall not press unduly on private enter- prise and prevent the dealers in curios from making a living, I think he meets the difficulty I have experienced up to the present time. But another difficulty I see is this : Where is the money to come from to buy up all these relics against the outside world ? The tourists who come from England have just as much money to spend on these curios as we have here ; and if we place the Maori relics in the same position as we have placed the Maori lands, and give the Government the pre-emptive right to purchase them, and if before any article can be purchased, say, in Auckland, application has to be made to the Governor in Council in Wellington, Heaven only knows when a reply will come, and the probability is that the purchasing of curios will be like Mohomet's coffin, between heaven and earth. Some little time ago there was  a Maori house for sale in Rotorua. $1,500 was asked for it, but the Government would not bur. The result was that the Germans are said to have bought it. An Hon. MEMBER .- That is quite a mistake. Mr. WITHEFORD .-- Well, it is understood on. However, that is not a fair comparison, because our friend the Native Minister can, I am informed, get better Maori houses for half the money if he pleases. Therefore, in connec- tion with this Bill, what I would like to see is that as little as possible in the way of restric- tion should be placed on the articles the people in Auckland who are curio dealers sell. When distinguished visitors are amongst them the Moris are accustomed to give them presents, and I do not think it is a right thing that distinguished persons to whom these presents are given should be stuck up by the Customs Department as this Bill suggests they might be. Now, if the Government of the country inti- mated to the tribes in New Zealand that they wanted to buy these relics, and were prepared to pay a good sum for any such articles they had for sale, I have no doubt they would be handed over to the Government at once. I do not see any reason for restricting private enter- prise to the full extent the Bill proposes. At the same time I must say I am a convert to the general principles of the Bill through the aamirable way in which the Minister has intro- duced it. If he can just simply arrange that private enterprise is not going to be interfered with I shall support it. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) .- I think it is but natural that any born New Zealander would desire to express a word or two in connection with a Bill of this character. I have to con- gratulate the Native Minister on the reception this Bill has met with. It think it a pity that it did not come down some years ago, before we lost as much as we have lost of these Maori relics. However, there is still much to be preserved, and that can be preserved; and in connection with a remark that was made by the member for Waihemo (Mr. T. Mackenzie) about a very valuable collection which he states he saw at Whitehaven, in the Old Country, and which he says was for sale, I would suggest to the Minister to take a note of that. From the statement made by the member for Waihemo, this collection contains articles that were pur- chased from sixty to seventy years ago, and, of course, have become very valuable. They may not be prized in the Old Country, and I think it is a very able suggestion that the Agent-General should be given some authority to collect some of these Maori relics that have passed to the Old Country, where perhaps they are less appreciated than they would be here. I quite approve of the suggestion, which I think is a very excellent one, that a special museum should be established at the rear of these buildings, where there is plenty of room avail- able for the purpose ; and the idea of allowing the different families to store their family relics there I also think is a very excellent idea, and would have the effect of drawing many valuable prizes to that building. I could not help but sympathize very much with the remarks of the honourable member for Auck- land City (Mr. Napier), when he stated that the Maoris were too generous in making gifts to distinguished visitors to their country, and frequently I am afraid these gifts, perhaps, are not appreciated at their true value. They pass into the hands of persons that really do not appreciate them, and they go out of the country and are cast on one side and are utterly lost to us. As an instance of this, one of the oldest families in Canterbury presented some family relics to the Mayor of Christchurch. The Mayor of Christchurch did not accept them as a personal gift ; they were given to him as Mayor, and he handed over these Maori relics to the Museum there. Now, it seems to me that when these gifts are made to the officials at the head of the Govern- ment in New Zealand they should be regarded as gifts to the people, and not as personal gifts. But, Sir, the fact is that nearly all the gifts that are made are not regarded in the spirit in which they are offered. They are offered to a person because that person fills an important position at the head of the Government or has an important position in the Government of this country, and they are accepted as personal gifts. They should not be accepted in that way, but as a gift to the community ; and that is the light in which a gift was regarded by the late Mayor of Christchurch, M .. Reece. Mr. ATKINSON .- Sir George Bowen was the same. 
<page>260</page>
excellent example followed by other gentlemen who fill important positions in this country, and visit the Maoris and receive gifts from them. In this connection we want also a storehouse of history. In discussing with the Native Minister a proposition that came before the House a few evenings ago, he mentioned the fact that a hill in the neighbourhood of the home of the late Minister of Lands, Sir John Mckenzie, bore a name which was not Maori at all. On the Minister inquiring from Mr. Parata, the member representing the Southern Maori District, Mr. Parata was able to tell a most interesting history of the name of that hill, and also many other interesting facts. Now, these facts have not been placed on record. Our friend is getting into years now, and in time he will pass from our midst, and the knowledge that he has of the neigh- bourhood in which he has lived the whole of his life, and his local knowledge of the history of the different places of interest, will pass from us for ever. It seems to me that now is the time for action. If we do not take steps now to preserve the history which by those coming after us will be very highly appre- ciated, it will be absolutely struck away from us, and there will be absolutely no possible chance of ever recording it. I had hoped that, in connection with the efforts to store these historical relics of this very interest- ing race that we have in this country, there would be an effort made and set on foot at once to collect the local Maori history of every dis-  trict in the colony. That is being done now so far as the North Island is concerned ; but I am pleading for the South Island, where nothing has been done in that connection. It is there where the effort should be made. In the North Island the Maoris are still very numerous, and the knowledge is still in their midst, and there is, perhaps, a little more time ; but in the South they are not increasing, and those who are able to give us the history are fast passing away, so that we require some immediate effort to be made to save the records. I trust the Govern- ment will do something in this direction, at the same time as they are moving in the direction of preserving to us and those who come after us the relics in connection with the history of the Maoris. Sir, I was very sorry to hear the purely commercial spirit of the speech of the honourable member for Auckland City (Mr. Witheford). Mr. WITHEFORD .- That is a matter for my constituents. Mr. ELL .- I hope such sentiments as those which the honourable member gave expression to will never find approval in the minds of the people who are growing up in this country. We have got too much of the utilitarianism spirit in this country, and we have too little sentiment. It would be a good thing for the character of the people of this country if they had a little more sentiment. The honourable inember is prepared to sacrifice everything for the sake of the almighty dollar; and that has been the god of America, and has helped to country, and I hope it will not take possession of the people in this country. Mr. WITHEFORD .- I rise to a point of order. The honourable member says I am pre- pared to sacrifice everything for the almighty dollar. There was nothing in my remarks which could lead any one to say that I entertain such a sentiment as that. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- I must ask the honourable member for Christchurch City (Mr. Ell) to withdraw that expression. Mr. ELL .- I meant, with regard to the speech of the honourable member, that it conveyed that impression. I did not mean that he, per- sonally, would do so, but his speech was in that direction. Mr. WITHEFORD .- The honourable mem- ber said that I was prepared to sacrifice every- thing to the almighty dollar. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- The honourable member says that he did not use the expression in a personal sense. Mr. WILFORD (Wellington Suburbs). - I propose to vote for the second reading of this Bill, and I am quite sure that every young New-Zealander will do the same. I do not think there was any necessity for the speech which was made by the member for Christ- church City (Mr. Ell) reflecting on the member for Auckland City (Mr. Witheford). I may say that every member of this House knows per- fectly well that the charge that the honourable member made against him is absolutely out of place. Mr. FOWLDS .- I rise to a point of order. The honourable member for Christchurch City has denied that he accused the honourable member for Auckland City of what has just been stated, and therefore the honourable member for Wellington Suburbs is out of order in repeating it. Mr. WILFORD .- I am sure the member for Auckland City (Mr. Witheford) will be pleased at the member for Auckland City (Mr. Fowlds) for his kindly interjection on his behalf. I take some interest in Maori relics, and I shall be very pleased to see this Bill passed if it will do something towards preserving our old Maori relics. In fact, I should like to see a stronger penalty clause enacted than is likely to be provided by the Governor in Council under section 7. We all know that it was the custom among the old Natives-and I am only speaking of what I know and from what I have heard from the old settlers in my district-for the old Maori chiefs to have their axes, green- stone meres, et cetera, buried with them. These last resting-places have been robbed of these treasures, and the graves of these old chiefs desecrated for the sordid purpose of sale or barter. I would like the Minister to introduce a clause providing for a penalty of ten years' hard labour on any man who steals from the graves of these departed chiefs the relics and orna- ments deposited there. I do not agree with the remark of the honourable member for 11.0. Auckland City (Mr. Witheford) in re- ference to the Maori house at Rotorua. Let 
<page>261</page>
house at Rotorua has what the Maoris call a " whakapapa," or history. Many members will not know, with regard to the Maori house. that it was obtained by Mr. Nelson, who occupies the Geyser Hotel at Whakarewarewa. There is one feature about that house which makes it of inestimable value, and that is its old Maori carving. Most of the carving we have on ornamental Maori houses to-day is modern to a degree, and the English carvers are able to imitate it ; but in this particular house there is a class of carving that we do not get to-day. I am informed by the member for the Southern Maori District that as many as seven tohungas or Maori experts in carving died during the progress of the work, and the idea of completing the work was abandoned through superstition, and it was put in one of the caves, I believe at Waiotapu. Mr. Nelson knew of its existence and of its history, and, with loving care and with a reverence for antiquity, carried it to Whakarewarewa and had it completed by Natives in a manner which entitles it to rank as a curio or memento of a bygone age. Therefore I should like the Government at once to seize, at the earliest possible moment, the opportunity, through the Hon. the Native Minister, of purchasing this curio from Mr. Nelson. It is a Maori house that no one has any idea of the value of. It is quite unique. In conclusion, I hope that this Bill will have the effect of preserving to New Zealand her relics and historical productions. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City). - Like  the other speaker, I take the opportunity of congratulating the Hon. the Native Minister upon bringing down this Bill. I think the Bill, when passed, is likely to prove of a much more far-reaching character than has been inti- mated or suggested by any speaker. Before entering into details on the question, I should like to call the Minister's attention to the inter- pretation clause of the Bill, which I fear may prove of too narrow a character. Itake it that, if the objects of the Bill are given effect to, the result would be the establishment of the most important museum in New Zealand, and pro- bably in the Southern Hemisphere ; and I should desire that this museum should be some- thing more than a mere storehouse of Maori relics. If it is to be a national museum, I would like it to partake of the character of a natural history museum of New Zealand, and I believe that really is the intention of the pro- moter of the Bill ; but I fear that if the inter- pretation of the Bill is adhered to it will restrict the operation of the Bill to Maori relics only. It says, - " In this Act, if not inconsistent with the context, ' Maori relics' includes any Maori relics or curiosities or other articles or things of historical or scientific value or interest or re- lating to New Zealand." Now, it is obvious, Sir, that the governing word in that clause is the word " Maori," and that the things of historical and scientific value there referred to are Maori things of historical and scientific value; and I would like to see the clude natural-history specimens, which are of as much value to us, as showing the main natural and indigenous features of the colony, as are the Maori curiosities as retaining to us the characteristics of the Maori race at the time the white man first came amongst them. It is unquestionably true that many specimens of great interest and value have been lost to science and the colony for want of some such protective law as this Bill provides, and which will in future be preserved if the interpretation clause be widened as I suggest. No one can question that it is desirable that we should preserve for all times these specimens of Maori workmanship-these stone implements and weapons for defence and offence-the imple- ments which were used by the Maori before the white man came here, and which have a peculiar interest which perhaps only the scientific student is likely to fully appreciate- I mean the interest far beyond that which is excited as a mere curio. For instance, when the white man came here, he found in New Zealand what was really an anachronism. He found a race here who were the counterpart of the most primitive races of the world, using just such weapons as were used by the primitive ances- tors of mankind, and he found them proficient in an unparalleled degree in the art of manu- facture and use of these articles. There is something more than the mere utilitarian value referred to by the honourable member for Christ- church City (Mr. Ell). I take it that, after all, however, the utilitarian value is something, and when he speaks of the sentimental value, the sentimental value itself has a utilitarian aspect, because sentiment itself is one of the most use- ful and powerful factors in our nature. But I would put it far beyond the mere commercial value as a curio. There is a value attached to these Maori weapons, and particularly to the earlier specimens of Maori art. Why, Sir, I believe recent investigations at Nicaragua have shown that there is a striking similarity be- tween the art and characteristics of the Maori of New Zealand and those of the primitive in- habitants of far-away Nicaragua; and this fact is borne out in the old stone carvings from the buried cities that have been there un- earthed. These facts in themselves go to show that, if New Zealand should build up a museum where these art relics and where these stone weapons and stone implements may be preserved for all time, we shall be doing much more than providing a mere show for ourselves and sight-seeing tourists. We shall be providing the scientific and intel- lectual world with specimens and objects which will have a value for all time to come to those who take an interest in archeology by marking out the actual position the Maori race occupied in the races of the world, and in the intellectual, artistic, and industrial development of mankind. This is a matter of some importance, and I am more desirous on that account that the scope of the Bill should be widened so as to embrace natural products. The fauna and flora of New Zealand have a peculiar value which attaches 
<page>262</page>
this Bill only applies to Maori objects, and it would be as well to provide against that. The fossilised remains that have been dis- covered, and will yet be discovered, in con- nection with the fauna and flora of the country will be of inestimable value to the scientific world, and surely should be preserved. Mr. CARROLL .- The word "maori" means indigenous. Mr. COLLINS .- I am afraid it is only a racial term. All I want is to be quite sure that the Bill will not be limited to the mere pre- serving of Maori relics, but to provide that objects of natural and scientific interest shall be equally preserved. I am perfectly satisfied with the intention of the Native Minister, and again congratulate him on having taken this step. We in Christchurch have a Museum of which not only Christchurch, but New Zealand, has every reason to be proud, and we have a very valuable collection of Maori curios, which is due very largely to the generosity of Christ- church citizens. It is a pity that in other places there is not a little more of this generous public spirit which has secured such valuable additions to our collections. And it is desirable that the State should now provide means of securing more complete collections than are possible by private effort or by individual generosity. It will be of inestimable value in time to come, both intellectually and scientific- ally. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) .- It is ex- ceedingly pleasant to see the manner in which this Bill has been received by all members who have spoken. I think I may say that I am entitled to the credit of having first raised this question, so far as this Parliament is con- cerned, for on the 4th July, in the present session, there will be found the following ques- tion on the Order Paper :- "Mr. BARCLAY to ask the Government, If they will take steps to legislate, as is done in other countries, to prevent valuable historical, artistic, or scientific relics, documents, articles, or things being disposed of outside New Zea- land without first being offered to the Govern- ment for purchase ?" True, the member for Waihemo also gave notice of a question dealing with the matter of Maori curios, but, as a matter of fact, I was a little before him. I am glad to see the Bill seems to include rather more than the member for Christchurch City thinks it does. As I read the Bill, it includes all objects of historical and scientific value, not necessarily peculiarly Maori. I think, if the honourable member will look at the Bill, he will see one clause reads in this way : " Maori relies,' includes any Maori relics or curiosities, or other articles or things of historical or scientific value or in- terest and relating to New Zealand." Mr. COLLINS .- The word " Maori" governs " articles or things." Mr. BARCLAY .- I contend that the word "Maori " applies only to " relics or curiosities." However, it is a matter that may easily be made plain in Committee. Sir, the study of Mr. Collins ceedingly dry, but that view is generally held by people who have not taken any very great trouble to study the subject. Any student of history will know that there is no pursuit more absorbing, none more interesting, than the perusal of the works of great historians. There are also a number of people who never seem to estimate the difficulty of writing a history. A good illustration occurs to my mind. Any person engaged in the practice of law must know how difficult it is in many cases, on coming before the Court, to ascertain the truth. Now, when you have living witnesses, and can bring them before a tribunal and examine and cross-examine, and yet find it difficult to get at the truth, what must be the difficulty of the historian when he can only refer, perhaps, to imperfect records and documents, as to some of which he may not know whether they are au- thentic or unauthentic? So that I say it is highly desirable that every possible effort should be made to secure every authentic relic, docu- ment, article, or thing connected with the early history of this colony. Something has been said as to the place where a national storehouse of these articles of historical value should be erected. The Hon. the Minister has suggested that perhaps some ground around this building might be used for that purpose. I think pro- bably that would be a very suitable place, but I must say it seems to me it would be rather more fitting that the building should be on the Museum grounds, and should be in some way connected with that institution. It has been said this Bill is too drastic in char- acter. Well, I admit it does appear to be very drastic in some of its provisions ; but the diffi- culty is that if you do not make it drastic it is exceedingly easy to slip out of its provisions. As far as I can judge, the Minister has adopted the best course in framing this Bill that, under the circumstances, he could have adopted. I am afraid that a great deal will have to be left to the Government in connection with the measure. It will have to be left to them and their responsible officers to decide what are articles, relics, or things which come within the scope of the Bill. It will have to be left with their officers to say whether they should purchase these articles or things, or whether they shall prohibit them leaving the country; and I suggest that probably in every district there will be local officers appointed by the Government-at any rate, in those districts where there are articles coming within the scope of the Bill-and that to these officers will be committed the duty of deciding in re- spect to the various articles which come under their notice. Of course, the difficulty about traders, I imagine, might be got over in this way : A trader would invite the local officer to inspect his stock. The local officer would go and inspect his stock in the shop, and he would take all the precautions possible to ascertain from the trader that he has no other articles or relics he proposes to dispose of in his shop or stock except those which he shows to the officer. The officer can say, "Oh, very well, then, so far as 
<page>263</page>
am quite willing that you should dispose of them as you please," and he might put a Government stamp on them. This will get over the difficulty in respect to the man who makes a business of selling Maori curiosities which are of no great value. It is not necessary for every member to rise to sing the praises of Mr. Hamilton ; but as that gentleman lives in my town, and is Registrar of the University there, and as I have the pleasure of his acquaintance, it may not be out of place if I add my meed of appreciation to his skill, his enthusiasm, and his unflagging industry in the acquisition of knowledge and the collection of everything available in connection with Maoris and Maori art. I sincerely trust that his know- ledge and ability will be taken advantage of in connection with this Bill, and with the other work which the Government very wisely is doing in connection with a permanent storehouse of Maori articles of interest. Major STEWARD (Waitaki) .- Sir, in com- mon with other speakers I tender my congratu- lations to the Hon. the Minister who has introduced this very desirable Bill, and I shall most cordially assist him, not only in the passage of the Bill, but also in every effort he may put forth with a view to preserving for all time the remains of that grand race which we are so proud to have associated with us in this colony of New Zealand. I think, however, Sir, that the honourable gentleman's Bill does not go far enough. In section 3 it is provided that it shall not be lawful to remove from the colony any Maori relics without first offering the same for sale to the Governor in Council for the benefit of the colony. Now, no doubt there is an implication that the Government will be prepared to purchase these articles for the benefit of the colony ; but there is no specific authority in the Bill enabling that to be done, and I would invite the honourable gentleman, when the Bill goes into Committee, to provide that specific authority ; and, further, I think, Sir, that he should follow his Bill up by placing a sum on the estimates to enable a beginning to be made. That sum could be renewed or If increased from year to year as required. he were to do that, he would then make his Bill immediately operative. If he does not do so, then the Bill is simply a sort of acade- mical expression on the part of this House of the desirability of something being done in the direction of its proposals. At any rate, that is how it appears to me. The honourable member for Wellington Suburbs referred to a very beautiful carved house which exists at Whaka- rewarewa. I think it is what is called-Mr. Monk will correct me if I am wrong-a " whare- puni." I understand it was intended to be used for a Runanga House or something of the sort ; but, at any rate, the carving of this edifice is said to be of a very excellent kind, and if that is so I think that certainly an effort ought to be made to acquire it for the colony. Then, Sir. I would like to offer this suggestion to the honourable gentleman-it perhaps may be con- sidered rather hypercritical, but it appears to what amended or enlarged. I do not think the word " relic " is the best word that could be used ; and if the honourable gentleman will look up the definition of the word " relic " in the dictionary he will find that it comprises these things -- namely, " that which is left after the loss or decay of the rest ; a remaining frag- ment ; the body of a deceased person ; some- thing preserved in remembrance; a memento, souvenir, or keepsake ; a bone or other part of saints or martyrs, or some part of their gar- ments." Now, Sir, that is not exactly what the honourable gentleman means by " relics," and I offer to him the suggestion that he should put in the word "antiquities " in substitution for "relics," or in addition thereto. I think that would not only provide a better title, but would also really enlarge the scope of the Bill. I am pleased to see this Bill emanating from the Go- vernment benches, and so very appropriately from an honourable gentleman who has the honour of being connected with the race whose "relics," as he calls them, he is so anxious to preserve. But I should like to see him go a little further. Not only do I think that he is entirely right in endeavouring to preserve the records of a past age, but I think also that he should extend his conserva- tive efforts in the direction of preserving the Maori terminology-the Maori names of places. I regard it as a disgrace to the colony that at our railway-stations and in public places we have painted up what are mere travesties of Maori words. We have numbers of stations, the names of which are displayed in large letters, but which names are not those of anything Maori, nor of anything I know of under the sun. The words do not belong to the language of any nation in the world. Some of them have impossible letters, like "1," in defiance of the fact that there is no such letter in the Maori language; and I think the honourable gentleman should urge upon his colleague who has control of the Railway Department the desirability of removing that scandal from New Zealand. It is a disgrace that visitors to this country should be misled by the mis- naming of places painted up in this way. A reference to this matter, I think, comes in very fairly in connection with the discussion of a measure to preserve Maori antiquities and relics, and I do hope the honourable gentleman will do something in this direction. Further, I would add that if he wishes to make his Bill operative, he should direct his personal efforts to the acquisition of Maori antiquities on behalf of the Government, and should follow up the Bill's proposals by placing a sum on the estimates to enable this to be done. Mr. MONK (Waitemata). - I feel myself rather unfortunate in having to speak after so many members who have dealt with features of the subject before us upon which I desired to offer an opinion, and my difficulty therefore in speaking now is to prevent myself from perpe- trating a mere repetition of previous speakers. I had marked, Sir, among the notes which I have made, to express some condemnation of 
<page>264</page>
sincere expressions of congratulation to the Hon. the Native Minister who has introduced the Bill as being almost his first effort, as I feel that it is superior to mere mercenary considera- tions, and is a step in a direction on which I can cordially and sincerely compliment him. I only wish that it had been done, as some honourable member has said, many years ago, so that some of the Maori antiquities which have disappeared from this country should be still in our midst, and, in fact, be a national possession. There is one phrase of his introductory speech too, on which 11.30. can compliment him. I know I that it is possible for him to very strongly impress the Natives that they should make the proposed museum the storehouse of the heirlooms and treasured articles which, though in diminished numbers, are still in their pos: session, and make the museum the repository of weapons, robes, specimens of ancient Maori art and historic objects that mingle with the themes of Maori lore, and he will have achieved much if he can induce them to voluntarily store them in a national museum such as we propose. And, along with these Maori antiquities, their story and history should be carefully prepared and laid side by side with the objects to which they refer. Now, with regard to the Bill, the ob- jection which I have to it is that it is altogether too wide in its scope, and, unlike some honour- able gentlemen who have spoken upon it, I say it is not sufficiently precise-it does more than that which we wish to attain. For instance, we do not desire to control any collection of merely reproductions of Maori skill which have now become a prominent feature of private enterprise. There are a number of Natives who have become particularly expert in repro- ducing the forms of ancient Maori art, and have with their improved tools adroitly turned out some work really more creditable in mani- pulation, though not in design, than that which their ancestors could possibly accomplish with the rude instruments they then possessed. For instance, the honourable member showed me to-day a little greenstone chisel that was once a valuable tool of the ancient Maori, and at one end of it there was a hole bored through ; and he and I knew at once that hole was bored by Natives long before they came into possession of our improved tools. There was something irregular about the edges of the hole-a wobble of the drill-that was a proof of its antiquity : just the sort of thing the antiquarian would delight in, and which gave to it a special value. Now, we do not need to get these modern articles unless it is some special production, something bespeaking extraordinary skill, a new birth, so to speak, of Maori art, or what I might term the atavism of the ancient instincts blending with modern training in producing special types of artistic skill. These sort of things, of course, ought to find a place in the museum which is suggested. But we should leave open to the strangers and visitors to our country these productions out of which the Natives now are making a consider- Mr. Monk in the slightest degree, but what we want to do is to give such power that the Customs officers at all the ports of New Zealand shall be able to detain articles that they know belong to Maori antiquity, and they should be first offered to the Government. Then, again, supposing the possessor of one of these particularly valu- able heirlooms or something of historic moment is desirous of selling it, yet is contriving to put a price on it that was felt to be an imposition, I think the Government should have the power of submitting it to a committee of three or four experts, and they should determine what is the proper value of the article. An allusion was made to the laws now prevailing in Italy ; but it is well known that the Italian law is not as represented by the honourable member for Auckland City. It only applies to special works of art; but we know that the world is being supplied with duplicates of these works of art in Italy, only the originals of which are not allowed to be sent out of the country. I think the Minister will admit that the greatest delinquents in carrying off the antique trea- sures of this land are the notables who come to this colony-such as the Royal visitors we had lately, and the various Governors of the colony. An honourable member has placed in my hands the regulations imposed by the Home authorities upon the Governors of this country with regard to gifts from the Natives, and he desires me to call the attention of the House to it. One instruction is as follows :- "1. Governors, Lieutenant - Governors, and all other servants of the Crown in a colony are prohibited from receiving presents offered for their personal acceptance by kings, chiefs, or other members of the Native population in or neighbouring to such colony. "2. When such presents cannot be absolutely refused without giving offence they are to be delivered up to the Government. To this rule there can be no exception unless with the ex- press sanction of the Secretary of State. "3. When the presents are exchanged be- tween Governors or other officers, acting on be- half of the Colonial Government in ceremonial intercourse with Native chiefs, rulers, or others, the presents received must belong to the Go- vernment, and such return presents as may be sanctioned by the Secretary of State will be given at the Government's expense." Now, in confirmation of this there is an instance to which my attention has been called, and I feel sure honourable members will be pleased that I should place it before the House : - "In 1871 Sir George F. Bowen, who was then Governor of New Zealand, whilst on a tour of observation through the colony, was proffered as a memento of his visit to the Pro- vince of Otago a beautiful work of art carved in stone by a Native artist. It represented the ' Moka bird mourning the death of the Wax- eye.' "- Now, there is a wrong word. I know the Native Minister will object to that word being used as an interpretation of any ancient Maori 
<page>265</page>
light eyes, evil eyes-the eyes that fascinated and the stare that makutu'd ; but they did not know of wax-eyes .- \-" and adorned with figures of ferns and creeping plants in the background. But His Excellency, though very sensible of the compli- ment to himself, refused to take the donation as a personal gift, deeming it to be 'unusual and improper for Governors of colonies to accept such valuable presents for their own use and advantage.' Nevertheless, with the consent of the donor, he undertook that it should be deposited in the Government House as public property, and as a lasting memorial of interest to the colonists and to visitors from abroad ; for it had always been his opinion that the Government House should illustrate the natural products and resources of the colony and the advance of its inhabitants in the use- ful and ornamental arts." And in appreciation of this graceful action of Sir George Bowen I should like to add to what I have just quoted my own experience when on a trip to the Old Country. I had a few hours at Malta, and I had the pleasure of visiting the museum at Government House, and what was most interesting there were the relics asso- ciated with the past history of that island. For instance, there was part of the dress worn by the intrepid Turkish general who fell in striving to retain that historic island for Moslem rule. There were specimens of the weapons and fire-arms that were used centuries ago ; and in the crypt of St. John's Cathedral I gazed with feeling interest on the actual armour worn by the two great warrior knights who did much to relieve Christendom from the scourge of the Turk. There were also the actual keys of Jeru- salem, which belonged to Godfrey of Bouillon. Any student of history and lover of liberty feeis a thrill of delight to look at and handle the relics of historical individuals of centuries ago. What would I not give, for instance, Mr. Speaker, if I could only have the very mere and the skin and bone of the tuatara which figured in the first great battle betwixt the Ngatiwhatua and the Waiohua, who a hundred and fifty years ago were the tribe occupying all the country about the City of Auckland, ending in disaster and slaughter to the latter. It took place close to Titirangi, a short distance west of Auckland. A chief of the Ngatiwhatua went out reconnoitring very early one morning. He was perfectly nude and well covered with shark's oil and ochre, shippery to the grip of a foeman. Suddenly he met the chief of the opposing sido-his enemy - bent on similar errand and equally prepared, and instantly they met together in deadly struggle, and the thud of their clashing limbs was heard afar, when, suddenly, the Ngati- whatua managed to impress with his mere a light tap ou the forehead of his antagonist, causing him to reel somewhat, to be quickly followed by a cloven skull; and, as the dying chief opened his mouth in the last gasp, a tuatara, a species of lizard, sprang from his mouth into that of the conquerer, who swallowed it, and so, possessed of that which had belonged to the Waiohua. An honourable member near says "Rubbish." I ask you, Mr. Speaker, how is it possible for me to maintain the fervour of my reliance on what was intrusted to me by an old tohunga as a great historic fact, amid the murmured scoffs of these unbelievers around me? I would give almost everything for that mere, and to see the veritable creature that was swallowed. Now, there are special features about the antiquities of New Zealand. In the first place, perhaps honourable members have not realised that the continuous scroll of the Maoris is a specialty of the race, and in that way I take exception to the honourable gentle- man who has previously spoken, and who con- sidered that we could get from the stores bequeathed by the ancient Maori evidence of the gradual progress of the human being from the Stone age to the more advanced period of man. I take it that the Maori race affords evidence in the opposite direction. If anybody claimed to have discovered proofs that the Maori race belonged to the ancient Egyptians I should be ready to believe it. The Maori race are the possessors of a perfected cerebral development. No better evidence of that can be supplied than by the fact that, when we took the sons of cannibals and educated them, they developed a taste for mathematics, and when they left the schools were still students of one of the most advanced sciences in which the human mind can revel. And if there is anything which honourable members who feel an interest in the Maori race should regret it is that they had not a literature, and therefore the means of storing their history, poetry, and imaginative creations. All that they had was the trifle transmitted by oral tradition ; and yet the poetry that remains is all akin to the principles on which rest the beautiful conceptions of Shakespeare. They have for themes the thrilling impulses of human passion, the conceptions of the human brain, struggling with the trammels of a meagre phrase- ology to give impressive expression to ideals of beauty and a patriotic endearment to country and kainga. All these are special themes of the Maori song and the framework of their lore ; and the pity is they had not a literature in which they could store it, each generation, as with us, building on the intellectual structures of preceding ages. But for them it sprung up spontaneously, as if indigenous in the heart and brain of the Maori. Honourable members may not have realised the importance that attaches to the continuous scroll, that is an inseparable feature in Maori art. There is only one spot, I believe-and upon this I had the assurance of Sir George Grey-only one spot in the world where there is any resemblance to the continuous scroll, which the art of the Maori claims for its own, and that is in Mexico ; and we know there have been lately made very remarkable discoveries in that part of Mexico known as Yucatan, showing the ruins of Cyclo- pean structures that may have been the pro- ductions of the ancient Egyptians, who may have reached America by travelling over the 
<page>266</page>
Natives may be the descendants of the ancient Egyptians of ten thousand years ago? There is the finished intellect and evidence that would suggest such a race. The ancient Egyptians were Monotheists, and the Lord's prayer has been found in the writings of the ancient Egyp- tians. And the Egyptians that the classics record located on the soil of Egypt were alto- gether in ignorance of the wonderful people that existed in that country thousands of years before them. And the abounding deities of the modern Egyptians were simply providing a god for every attribute which had been ascribed to the one Supreme Being that the first Egyptians recognised. But this is by the way, except to suggest a source from which the Maori mind is imbued with superstition, and his belief in a future state, and was brought with him as he embarked on the tranquil waters of the Pacific. I will now make mention of the necessity for careful selection of Maori antiquities. It is not in the neatness of workmanship, but it is in having preserved these curious forms associated with the chief historic events and features of the social life of the Maori. What would one not give for the zigzagged handled paddle that some celebrated tohunga waved when offering up his karakia and invocations to the god of the seas before a great fishing expedition started on a perilous voyage ? It is the lore associated with that function and the special service that gives its historic value ; and the rude emblem of the waves is required to make it realistic, and one need not expect that it would be beautifully carved as it can be done to-day ;  but it would carry one back to the long roll of ancestors, and you would find how, even in the Maori mind, there existed one great con- ception that there was a supernatural existence to which his own existence on this earth must render deference. An Hon. MEMBER .- I would not give six- pence for it. Mr. MONK .- It is no use, Mr. Speaker, trying to get up reverent enthusiasm, or that respectful love of Maori lore, when one feels that he is surrounded with these infidel friends. They are only capable of being stirred by the cry of " Faugh-a-ballagh," or some such extra- ordinary and uncouth expression belonging to our ancestors. With that I could stir their souls ; but when I talk about the Maori lan- guage, the euphonistic-sounding vowels which equal the softest of languages-even the Italian or Spanish affords no excelling peer-it is Greek to them. Then, Sir, there are also treasures that, I believe, have not yet been discovered. I believe there are some caves that will be found in the course of time where the Maori ancestors have been laid. Because they did not bury their chiefs in ancient times ; they took them away to remote places, and there they covered them up with great secrecy, on account of the revengeful disposition of the surrounding tribes of enemies, who used the bones of dis- tinguished enemies for the purpose of degrading them by using them for fishing purposes ; and, for that reason, whenever a great chief died the Mr. Monk after the flesh was decayed away. And along with the remains of their chiefs they often laid their special implements, which had become tapu because of being with them when they died. Now, I know one case where a great chief of the North had some very valuable greenstone implements of various kinds. He was very par- ticular in guarding these things, and would not even intrust them to his family or immediate relatives, and he hid them. Unfortunately, the man came to his dotage without revealing the secret of their hiding-place, and as large a sum as £800 has been offered by the Na- tives for the discovery of this greenstone trea- sure. Such is the estimation of value that the Natives put upon them. If those things were discovered it would be our duty to treasure them. Then, we are wanting, I think, in some capable writer with the heart of the lover ; and I often wish I had the gift myself, and the benefit of university education, that, with the knowledge I have of the Maori, I might collate a great deal of the rambling information which exists upon Maori history and legends. They should be placed in more terse and readable form than they have at present. There is a very valuable collection in the Auckland Museum belonging to Major Mair. There are not many collections which contain better types of some of the special objects the chiefs in the olden times possessed, but unfortunately very few are originals ; they are replicas by clever carvers, and their value consists simply in their repre- sentation of arms, tools, scent-boxes, and other things used by the Maoris. I do not suggest that these should be taken from the Auckland Museum, but I understand that the owner still retains some interest in them, and I believe he has been offered a considerable price for them, and it would be well for the Government, if the Auckland people cannot manage to secure their retention on their own account, to do so. I think I have said enough on this subject. I should like to see the Bill submitted to Com- mittee to reduce it in scope and yet make it \--- more precise in its operation, so that persons in the possession of genuine relics could not dis- \- -- pose of them privately before submitting them to a committee of experts to determine the price \--- that should be paid for them by the Govern- ment if it desired to buy. I would remind the House that it will not interfere with the trade spoken of by the member for Auckland City \---- (Mr. Witheford). I hope that trade will in- crease by attention being attracted to old forms of Maori art. The new students appear to be excelling what was produced by their ancestors, and that is what we wish to encourage; but I do not want to suddenly develop a mercenary spirit, but rather to leaven the public mind with the evidences of social conditions in regard to the old Maoris that are fast disappearing in historic shadows. Mr. A. L. D. FRASER (Napier). - The majority of members who have spoken have commenced by congratulating the Minister who introduced the Bill. I do not think I can con- gratulate him, because I think it is too late by 
<page>267</page>
House. But we must not go too far with it. niteen or twenty years ago we might have con- We must not intimidate or prevent the Natives gratulated the Minister on bringing it forward, but I am afraid it has been left to a very late from carrying out works of carving and mat- hour for us to endeavour to conserve the making. If it is made mandatory that they valuable relics and historical reminiscences we are not allowed to sell anything in the way of bave of the past. Before saying a few words on carving, then it is only a matter of a few years the Bill, I would like to remark that it was when it will become a lost art. At the pre- very pleasurable to listen to the speech of the sent moment we have artists-no other word honourable member for Waitemata. It was not can I use-in the Maori race making most beautiful things. Possibly they may be in only that he dealt very carefully with the measare, and offered very feasible and far-see- imitation of historical weapons, historical ing suggestions for its amendment, but he also mats, historical patus, but still they are re- gave us a pleasant twenty or thirty minutes of miniscences of the past, and if we cannot get the original we should certainly keep a Maori history, and I only regret that there were not more members present, and that the replica if we can purchase it. We should not in any way deter the Natives from making others, galeries were not packed to the doors. I am not saying this in any satirical way; I am in but give them encouragement to preserve the earnest in my remark, for it would have been art of their ancestors. The view I take is that a revelation. especially to members from the the Government, in instituting this museum, or South Island, if they could only realise the at- whatever the Minister may propose to call it-I traction there is in the subject, even for those suppose it will be a national gallery of Native who have only touched the hem of the garment history-should have the right of refusal. That of Maori history. It would also attract those is to say, if any person has a Maori curiosity he who have not had that intercourse with the wishes to sell, either inside or outside the colony, Natives that those who have come from the the Government should have the first right of North Island have, and it might have caused purchase or refusal. Honourable members will them to take a little more interest in the Native notice there is no provision made as to deciding legislation that is year after year brought before what is a fair price as between the Government the House, and with regard to which, I regret and the owner of the property. That will, no doubt, have to be provided for by regulation. to say, a satisfactory horizon is not yet visible. I would here say that honourable members have perhaps been interested in the measure buy. by some of the stories that were told by the Those honcurable member for Waitemata. reference in section 3 to the effect that Maori are stories that have been handed down from relics must be first offered for sale to the Go-  vernment. I presume that the inference is that the arrival of the migration, and previous to that the Government has power to buy them, though were handed down generation after generation by the historians of sunny Hawaiki. And, when it is not so specifically stated in the Bill. we have this Maori museum, I trust that side by side with the Maori relics will be placed volumes chronicling the folklore of the Maoris, which I ment in that direction will be accepted by the Minister in Committee. Now, in section 4, understand is now being collected by an expert from what the Minister has told me, there is on behalf of the Government. If those books a word which is not intended. It says, in the were printed, I believe that members would pre- event of the Governor in Council declining to fer to go to them, to revel in them, to delight in purchase such Maori relic, "it shall not be law- them, rather than to very many of the books ful to remove the same from the colony." It now on the shelves of our library. The stories should read "it shall be lawful." However, told by the Maoris are beautiful in conception. that is probably a printer's error, and will be Their ideas, their proverbs, are classical, and it corrected. Now, this Bill, when placed on the is no exaggeration to say that it cannot be statute-book, should simply give the Govern- imagined by the European what he has lost by ment the right of refusal, not an absolute not being better acquainted with the Maori, pre-emptive right over the whole of the Maori and with the unwritten history of the race. I curios. That is to say, if I have a collection venture to suggest that the honourable member of Maori curios, before I can sell to any for Waitemata, who has a marvellous flow of other person I must give the Government language, a marvellous diction, owes much of the right to purchase any curio I have. it. as does the Native Minister himself, But those are amendments that can be made to the fact that he has spent much time when we get into Committee. The honourable with the Maoris, learned their language, member for Auckland City (Mr. Witheford) was conversed with them, and inhaled with their afraid the Bill was too drastic, as it would pre- poetic legends the picturesqueness of their vent people from selling curios outside the expression and mental ideas. I believe we colony. But many of our laws are drastic. For would have the most euphemistical way of instance, we do not allow certain goods to come speaking that any educated person could pos- into the country until the Customs duties are sibly dream of if we were but to study the paid, which is drastic though necessary ; and, Maori language and the Maori expressions. in a different way, we must have a drastic Sir, as to the Bill, I wish to say that its object remedy for this danger which is threatening is undoubtedly a good one, and I am sure it An Hon. MEMBER .- There is no authority to Mr. A. L. D. FRASER .- Well, there is a An Hon. MEMBER .- It should be stated. Mr. A. L. D. FRASER .- Possibly an amend- 
<page>268</page>
perfectly sure that any one who takes a truly scientific interest in collecting these curios- not the man who will buy an article for 5s. with the object of making a monetary profit out of it, but the true scientist-will be only too willing that the colony should keep these relics held in trust for him or others coming after him. In fact, there are collectors in New Zealand of whom I can with perfect safety say that when the Government apply to them they will hand over their relics to the Govern- ment to hold in trust for the owners and for the benefit of the colony; be- cause they have only been collected for purely scientific objects, and it will be suffi- cient pleasure for the man who owns them if he knows they are provided for in a house where he and the world could see and appre- ciate them. If they were placed in the museum which it is intended to build for this purpose, we should find that he would have pleasure in looking at them himself, and that the whole world would not only study and learn to appre- ciate them, but also admire him for his energy in collecting them. Therefore I suggest that when this Bill is on the statute-book the Go- vernment should publicly give notice, not only to Europeans but to Maoris, that they will hold in trust their ancestral curios. If they do so I am certain many Maoris will willingly come forward with relics which they would not part with for all the wealth of the Indies, but for safe keeping would be glad to deposit them with the Government to hold on trust. Just one word more. I had intended to deal with some of the stories of old New Zealand that were so graphically told by the honourable mem- ber for Waitemata. The honourable mem- ber for Waitemata told us, only in more euphemistic language, of the doings of the knights of old and their Spartan bravery. Evidently some honourable members do not credit that story about the tuatara ; and yet the honourable member, on the floor of this House, recognising his responsibility as a truthful man, told it, and, as I do, believed it. I can assure honourable members that some ten or twelve generations ago there were tremendous feats performed by some of the natives of Maoriland. As an illustration, in Heretaunga there was a chief who had the simple name of Tuwhakaperei, and it is a well-authenticated fact that he was a most successful toa, or warrior, and on one occa- sion, when he had annihilated his opponents, he proceeded to cut them up and take their hearts out. He was an epicure, and proceeded to cook these hearts over a fire, and this place is named to this day Te Ahimanawa a Tuwhaka- perei, meaning "The Fire where the Hearts were cooked by Tuwhakaperci." But just as he got them nicely browned, and possibly was gloating over this bonne bouche, he was alarmed by some of his opponents who had survived the slaughter, and who had rallied and returned to reconnoitre. He jumped to his feet, and, from where he was cooking on the side of the stream, it is recorded that, in a standing jump, he jumped two miles and three quarters and three yards. Mr. A. L. D. Fraser Mr. A. L. D. FRASER .- Why, Sir, it is measured, and his footprints are to be seen there to this day. An Hon. MEMBER .- Next ! Mr. A. L. D. FRASER .- I tell honourable members this can be proved ; the stream that he jumped over is there now. Then, again, his descendants are now alive, and they have been "jumping " land ever since. There was also a story-I do not know which section it refers to-which is worth mentioning. We congratu- late ourselves in having one spot in the universe where there are no objectionable reptiles. Now, New Zealand, at all events, is singular in that respect, and to account for it we have to go to Maori history, and it is equally as true as the tuatara story and the story of the sensational leap. One of the first ancestors of the Maoris to visit New Zealand was Tamatea Pokaiwhenua. When he came here he found the country in- fested with reptiles, but he had the attribute of the well-known Irish saint who has long passed away, but who is known in history to this day as Saint Patrick. But, instead of driving them out into the sea by an incantation, or the waving of hands, or prayer, Maori history tells us that he (Tamatea) carried with him the sacred fire of his ancestors, and he just set fire to a spot in the North Island and it swept from one end of Maoriland to the other, and no reptile was left alive. And so we find none here to-day, and for this blessing we have to thank the Maori. Now, as to tracing the Natives back to Egypt, as referred to by Mr. Monk, we find that sacred fire was also continually referred to in the old history of Egypt, and that sacred fire above spoken of is supposed to have been brought by the ancestors of Tamatea from their ! original abode on the banks of the Nile. I have taken up rather much time in this interesting discussion, but I hope it may have done some ... good. I know I have greatly appreciated the dissertation of the honourable member for Waitemata, and I sincerely hope the result of to-night's debate will encourage South Island members to take a little more interest-I do not say it disrespectfully-than they have done in the past in Native legislation and affairs. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) .- The honourable member for Napier, whose remarks I listened to with very great interest and plea- sure, misrepresented me in one instance. He said that the member for Auckland City was afraid it was too drastic a Bill. I added it was too drastic a Bill unless the Government were prepared to buy the relics, because my applica- tion of this sentiment was exactly the same as the honourable member for Napier's senti- ment in regard to Maori land. If the Govern- ment had the pre-emptive right to buy Maori relics and Maori lands, and did not find any money to buy either, and did not allow any private business to be done, it simply meant that Maori relics and Maori lands could not be sold, and it was unfair to the owners and the buyers. Mr. PARATA (Southern Maori) .- I am sorry to say that, in my opinion, this Bill has been 
<page>269</page>
Orders. It has not been translated into the Maori language. I never saw the Bill until it came down this evening. However, it is not my intention to oppose or obstruct its passage. I sincerely congratulate the Minister on having brought down such a Bill-a measure which, a> I understand it, is intended to conserve for the benefit of future generations Maori relics, curios, and articles of historical or national in- terest. But there is one provision in the Bill to which I must take exception. It seems to be intended to establish a system of pre- emptive right on the part of the Crown alone to purchase such articles, on similar lines to the pre-emptive right that the Crown has hitherto claimed and exercised in regard to the purchase of Native land. For instance, if a Maori desires to dispose of a relic within the meaning of this Butl he must offer it to the Governor first. No matter how inadequate the price the Governor may offer for the article, the intending vendor must accept that or nothing, even although there may be private purchasers prepared to give many times the price offered by the Go- vernor. I hope to see that provision expunged or considerably softened in Committee. But, generally speaking, I support the Bill in so far as it provides for the preservation of valu- able Maori relics and specimens of Maori art -an art which has now become almost obsolete, for there are only a very few of the older generation now surviving who still retain the knowledge how to execute modern repre- sentations of the old carvings, and matters of  that kind. I have received a communication from Mr. Hamilton requesting me to support this Bill, and I feel that I am justified in doing that, as it is with the object of conserving Maori relics. Sir, I regret to have to state that, with regard to the South Island of New Zea- land, the art of Maori carving upon ancient lines is a lost art, for the reason that the older generation who were versed in it have passed away. But there are still in the possession of members of the present generation of South I-land Maoris valuable articles to which attach family history-weapons and other articles of value still carefully safeguarded by their pre- sent owners. I myself have in my possession ancient family relics, heirlooms that are at least six generations old, and more than that in some instances. I have some ancient relics in my possession which have been buried with their deceased owners over and over again, perhaps five or six times some of them. And no doubt the House will understand my feelings when I say that nothing would ever induce me to part with them to any stranger, and that it would hurt me more than I can say to think that under any circumstances such beirlooms should pass out of the possession of my immediate family, much less leave the colony. However, I am pleased to see that one provision of this Bill guards against the removal from New Zealand of heirlooms or valuable rettes of the description of which I speak. Now, Sir. I was very pleased to hear the suggestion that emanated from the honourable member for the necessity which at present exists for the correction of the spelling of the Maori names of places throughout New Zealand. I think this Bill affords us a happy opportunity in that direction, and that it would be most advis- able to insert a clause dealing with that question. I say that the spelling of all these misspelt names ought to be corrected, because, if they are worthy of perpetuation, why should not the names be perpetuated correctly, and spelled as they ought to be in Maori? We might have a list of these Maori names as now misspelt and as finally corrected com- piled and hung up or exposed to view in the national museum which I hope it is contem- plated by the Government eventually to esta- blish as the ultimate and logical outcome of this Bill we are now discussing. With regard to another matter to which my attention was drawn by the honourable member for Wel- lington Suburbs, the honourable member depre- cated the practice that has been indulged in by some unscrupulous persons of desecrating ancient Maori graves with the object of obtain- ing relics that are supposed to be therein con- tained. In both Islands of New Zealand there are some ancient caves, especially in the South Island, which have been used as burying- places ; and the only people who have the temerity to desecrate those graves-for they are actually graves-are Europeans ; and I say that all residents in or visitors to New Zealand should be prohibited from desecrating our old burying-places. They should not be allowed to enter into these places and treat them in the sacrilegious manner in which they frequently do. I have in my mind at the present time some very extensive caves in the neighbour- hood of Waiau, which will be shortly reached by railway. They are on the road to Lake Te Anau, and I say that all valuable articles obtained from caves such as these of which I speak, any old heirlooms, any articles that are revered and have an historical value attaching to them, should be given a place in the national museum. And I would ask the Government and the Minister in charge of the Bill that, when the supplementary esti- mates are brought down, he will see that a sum of money is placed upon them for the pur- pose of establishing this museum, so that we may commence to make some practical begin- ning. What is the object of talking about the matter in this sort of perfunctory way if we do not do something practical to give effect to the idea. I say again, Sir, that I am very pleased indeed to be able to congratulate the Minister on having brought down a Bill like this for the conservation and preservation of ancient relics and curios illustrative of the history of the Maori. Now, Sir, the honourable member for Waitemata favoured the House with a very in- teresting account of the doings of a famous chief of ancient times, who flourished in the northern part of this Island ; and was followed by the honourable member for Napier with an equally interesting anecdote of a very remark- able feat performed by an athletic old warrior 
<page>270</page>
I must keep up the reputation of the South Island. I will therefore conclude my remarks with the following little story : About five or six gene- rations ago there flourished a famous toa of the Ngatimamoe Tribe, who owned the country round about Otakou. His name was Tarewai. He was a very brave and famous warrior, and was on one historical occasion surprised while alone, and closely pursued by a large body of the enemy along the beach at Otakou Heads. He fled towards Pukekura Pa, where his friends were, and they, who were eagerly watching the chase, shouted and waved encouragements to Tarewa from the pa, when he, being very hard pressed indeed, suddenly sprang into the air, just as his enemies almost had him within their grasp, and, seizing a waving branch of a tree growing about midway up the face of the cliff on which the pa stood, made use of its spring to propel him right up to the summit of the cliff and over the wall into the pa amongst his friends, . leaving his disappointed enemies aghast with astonishment on the beach below. On another occasion this famous man was treacherously en- trapped in a pa near Makahoe Bay, where he was seized and overpowered and pinned down to the ground by his enemies, and his weapons were taken from him. His enemies then pro- ceeded to carve him open with a shark's-tooth weapon, the intention being to disembowel him and cook him and cat him. He pretended to be absolutely overcome, and he allowed his enemies to cut him open until they began to cut deep near his heart, when he gave a yell of such extraordinary power and struggled with such superhuman force that he threw his cap- tors off and escaped. He ascended a high hill close to the same place, and that hill to this day is known as Te Puke-o-Tarewai. He re- mained in the bush until his wound was healed. He afterwards came back and succeeded in re- gaining possession of his weapon. He came back one night silently, and as his enemies were seated round a fire talking about the very Weapon he was in search of, handing it about from one to the other and making contemptuous allusions to himself-and while they handed it round, Tarewai suddenly sprang into their midst and succeeded, as I have said, in getting it into his possession again, bounded over the wall of the pa, and into the bush, and so disap- peared ; and he ultimately killed numbers of these same enemies of his in revenge for his wound. There was another famous gentleman who once lived in the locality I have named. He drank the whole of the Mataura River at one draught, and left it absolutely dry. This gentleman's name was Kopuwai, and his wife was Kaiamio. I could tell the House many remarkable tales about him ; but, Sir, I think I will close my remarks with that one story, for I think I have kept up the reputation of the South Island, and I do not think even the member for Waitemata or the member for Napier could tell a more remarkable story. Mr. CARROLL (Native Minister) .-. I do not think honourable members wish me to delay them any longer, and I shall therefore make Mr. Parata fully to the speeches of this evening ; they have been of a varied and interesting character. One must feel pleased at the unanimity with which members have expressed their approval of the measure. I cannot go into the many arguments that have been brought forward, but I may say generally that I am quite prepared to meet the wishes of members, knowing as I do that we have all one common object in view which we wish to have effected. As to the nature of the Bill, whether it is too drastic or whether it does not go far enough, or whether it is wide enough in its scope or whether it is too limited, are matters that can easily be settled in Committee. It is not an easy thing to draft a Bill on a sub- ject such as this with any exactitude. I have searched everywhere to find something to guide me, and I defy honourable members, let them make what research they like, to find any- thing in the way of legislation enacted else- where or made law by other countries that will serve as something to go by. At all events, such is not within the precincts of our library. The only reference I have found to legislation has been the reference made by Lord Cromer in his report on the preservation of art and other treasures in Egypt ; so that I think honourable members will hear with me if the drafting of the Bill is not letter-perfect and fails to provide for every possibility. How- ever, so long as we are all of one opinion as to what is required, I am certain that in Com- mittee our combined intelligence will be able to frame something that will carry into effect what is considered desirable. I quite agree with what has been urged -- that when the sup- plementary estimates are brought down there should be a sum thereon to give effect to the practical side of the question. We are dealing with the sentimental side of the question just now, and the practical side must be considered in the way indicated -that is, by some pro- vision for a vote for the purpose. I could speak at some length on the subject of Maori history, with all its interesting branches, but considera- tion for honourable members at this late hour must be my apology. Bill read a second time. The House adjourned at seventeen minutes to one o'clock a.m. (Saturday). # 