<page>1</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788238&seq=29</url>
NEW ZEALAND.
=== PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES.
=== Second Session of the LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Monday, 1st July, 1901. Opening of Parliament-Swearing-in of Members- Death of Queen Victoria. OPENING OF PARLIAMENT. PARLIAMENT was prorogued on the 22nd Oc- tober, 1900, to the 20th December, 1900; thence prorogued to the 21st February, 1901; thence prorogued to the 18th April; thence prorogued  to the 11th May; and further prorogued to the 1st July, when it met for the despatch of business. The Parliament was opened by Commission. The Legislative Council being met, Four of the five Commissioners-namely, Sir H. J. MILLER (Chief Commissioner), the Hon. Captain BAILLIE, the Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER, C.M.G., and the Hon. Mr. W. KELLY-took their seats. The CHIEF COMMISSIONER said,-I have to acquaint the Council that His Excellency the Governor, not being able to be personally present here this day, hath been pleased to cause a Commission to be issued in order to the opening and holding of this session of Par- liament. The CHIEF COMMISSIONER commanded the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod to inform the members of the House of Representatives that the Commissioners desired their immediate attendance in the Legislative Council Chamber to hear the Commission read. The members of the House of Representa- tives being come, The CHIEF COMMISSIONER said, - His Excellency the Governor, not being able to be present here to-day, hath been pleased, in order to the opening and holding of this session of Parliament, to cause letters patent to be passed under the seal of the colony constituting us, the several honourable members therein named, his fourteenth Parliament. | Commissioners to do all things in His Excel- lency's name and on his part necessary to be performed in this session of Parliament. This will more fully appear by the letters patent, which will now be read. The letters patent were then read by the CLERK OF PARLIAMENTS. The CHIEF COMMISSIONER said,- Honourable Legislative Councillors, and gentle- men of the House of Representatives, we have it in command from His Excellency the Gover- nor to let you know that on Tuesday, the 2nd day of July instant, at half-past two o'clock in the afternoon, His Excellency the Governor will declare to you in person the causes of his calling this session of Parliament together. However, it being proper and desirable. owing to the lamented death of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, that members of both Houses should take the oath of allegiance to His Most Gracious Majesty King Edward the Seventh, His Excellency the Governor requests that you, honourable gentlemen of the Legislative Coun- cil, and you. gentlemen of the House of Repre- sentatives, will presently repair to the places where you usually sit and there take the oath of allegiance. The members of the House of Representatives then withdrew. SWEARING-IN OF MEMBERS. The Hon. the SPEAKER said he had re- ceived the following letter from the Colonial Secretary with respect to the oath of allegiance to King Edward the Seventh :- " Colonial Secretary's Office, Wellington, 1st July, 1901. " SIR,-I have the honour to inform you that it is considered proper and desirable that the oath of allegiance to His Majesty the King should be administered to all members of both Houses of the General Assembly at the com- mencement of the present session, being the first session held since His Majesty's accession. " His Excellency the Governor will be pre- pared to administer the said oath of allegiance to you at Government House at noon this day, and 
<page>2</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788238&seq=30</url>
I enclose herewith a warrant under the hand of His Excellency anthorising you to administer the said oath to members of the Legislative Council .- I have, &c., "J. G. WARD. "The Hon. Sir Henry John Miller, M.L.C., Speaker of the Legislative Council, Welling- ton." The enclosure was as follows :- "RANFURLY, Governor. "To all to whom these presents shall come : Greeting. "In pursuance of the authority in me vested by the Constitution Act, and of all other au- thorities me enabling in this behalf, I, Uchter John Mark, Earl of Ranfurly, Governor of the Colony of New '/ ealand, do hereby authorise the Honourable Sir Henry John Miller, Knight, Speaker of the Legislative Council of the said colony, to administer to members of the said Legislative Council the oath or affirmation of allegiance to His Majesty the King. "Given under the hand of His Excellency the Right Honourable Uchter John Mark, Earl of Ranfurly ; Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George ; Governor and Commander-in Chief in and over His Majesty's Colony of New Zealand and its Dependencies; and issued under the seal of the said colony, at the Government House, at Wellington, this first day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and one. "J. G. WARD." Members then took the oath of allegiance, and subscribed the oath. DEATH OF QUEEN VICTORIA. The Hon. the SPEAKER read the following message from His Excellency the Governor :- " RANFURLY, Governor. " It is the painful duty of the Governor to inform the Legislative Council that, amidst the lamentations of her subjects and the grief of the civilised world, our late Most Gracious Sove- reign Queen Victoria departed this life on Tues- day, the 22nd day of January, 1901, between the hours of six and seven of the clock in the even- ing, at Osborne House, in the Isle of Wight. "Her late Majesty was succeeded by her eldest son, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, who, in England, on the 24th day of January, 1901, and in New Zealand on the 28th day of the same month, was proclaimed King by the style and title of Edward the Seventh. "The Proclamation as made in New Zealand was recorded in the Gazette of the 4th day of February, 1901, in the following terms :-- ## " PROCLAMATION. "' WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God to call to His mercy our late Sovereign Lady Queen Victoria of Blessed and Glorious Memory, by whose decease the Imperial Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and all other Her late Majesty's dominions, is solely and rightfully come to the High and Mighty Prince Edward : Now, therefore, We, Uchter John Mark, Earl of Ranfurly, the Governor of the Colony of New Zealand, Richard John Seddon, a Member of Her late Majesty's Privy Council, Joseph George Ward, Acting-Premier of the said colony, and the Members of the Executive Council of the said colony. assisted by Members of both Houses of the General Assembly, Judges, Magistrates, and Officers of Courts, Ministers of Religion. Mayors, Chairmen, and Members of Local Bodies, and numerous other representa- tive European and Maori citizens here present, do now hereby, with one full voice and consent of tongue and heart, publish and proclaim that the High and Mighty Prince Albert Edward is now, by the death of our late Sovereign of Happy and Glorious Memory, become our only lawful and rightful Liege Lord, Edward the Seventh, by the Grace of God, King of the United King- dom of Great Britain and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India, Supreme Lord in and over the Colony of New Zealand and its Dependencies, to whom we do acknowledge all ... . faith and constant obedience with all hearty and humble affection, beseeching God, by whom kings and queens do reign, to bless the Royal Prince Edward the Seventh with long and happy years to reign over us. "Given at Wellington, in the Colony of New Zealand, this twenty-eighth day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and one. "' RANFURLY. ". R. J. SEDDON. 1 "'J. G. WARD. "W. C. WALKER. "' WM. HALL-JONES. "C. H. MILLS. "' DUDLEY ALEXANDER, Captain. "'GOD SAVE THE KING !' " On the day of the accession to the Throne, His Majesty the King was pleased to make a declaration in the following terms :- "' Your Royal Highnesses, My Lords, and Gentlemen, - This is the most painful occa- sion on which I shall ever be called upon to address you. "'My first and melancholy duty is to an- nounce to you the death of my beloved mother, the Queen, and I know how deeply you, the whole nation. and I think I may say the whole world, sympathize with me in the irreparable loss we have all sustained. ". I need hardly say that my constant endea- vour will be always to walk in her footsteps. In undertaking the heavy load which now devolves upon me. I am fully determined to be a Consti- tutional sovereign in the strictest sense of the word, and, as long as there is breath in my body, to work for the good and amelioration of my people. " I have resolved to be known by the name of "Edward," which has been borne by six of my ancestors. In doing so I do not undervalue the  name of " Albert " which I inherit from my ever- to-be-lamented great and wise father, who, by  universal consent, is, I think, deservedly known  
<page>3</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788238&seq=31</url>
by the name of " Albert the Good," and I desire that his name should stand alone. "' In conclusion, I trust to Parliament and the nation to support me in the arduous duties which now devolve upon me by inheritance, and to which I am determined to devote my whole strength during the remainder of my life.' "The Governor is fully assured that the Legislative Council .shares in the deep sorrow which has befallen His Majesty and the Empire by the lamented death of His Majesty's mother the late Queen, who, through the sixty-four years of her reign-the longest and most bene- ficent in the history of our race-endeared her- self to her people by her manifold excellences and virtues. " The Governor is also assured that the mem- bers of the Legislative Council will testify their lovalty to the Throne and person of His Most Gracious Majesty by taking the oath of allegi- ance before entering upon the ordinary busi- ness of the country. This has already been done by the Hon. the Speaker. " Government House, Wellington, 1st July, 1901." The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- Sir, it is only proper and fitting that the Legislative Council should record its feelings on this occasion, and pass a resolution expressive of them. I beg to move the following resolution : " That a respectful address be presented to His Majesty, to assure His Majesty that the Coun- cil de ply laments the death of our late Most Gracious Sovereign Queen Victoria, whose name and reign will ever be held in lasting remem- brance by Her late Majesty's sorrowing and loving subjects. This Council respectfully begs to submit to His Majesty its congratulations on his accession to the Throne, and assures His Majesty of the Council's loyal attachment to his person, and desires to pray for His Majesty the glory of a reign to be distinguished by peace, prosperity. and a general advance in the social and economic conditions of his subjects." In moving the resolution, I may be excused from dealing with the matter at very great length, be- cause the loss of our late Queen and the accession of his present Majesty has been with us and in our hearts ever since the sad event occurred. We have all realised it more or less, but I really believe more, because the more any one of us thought over it the more it came home to us what a good Queen she was, and how much we, her subjects, even in this distant part of the Empire, owed to her. If it was nothing else but her example, we, every one of us, in our homes and families, in our social circles, owe more than we know to Her late Majesty-more than we can realise, perhaps, because none of us have lived in other times -- for the great legacy of a pure and perfect life. What has come about by the mere change of the name of the sovereign is almost more than any one of us could realise, because, although some of us may have been born in the reign of her predecessor, none of us have really lived a conscious life in any other reign than that of the late Queen. Therefore the mere change in the name of the sovereign from Queen to King has been such a change as to bring home the fact to all of us. We have been realising this change ever since the event happened. We have realised still more by the visit of their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York how much the late Queen desired that she, through her heirs, should be more intimately acquainted with the colonies and their conditions ; and we also know that His present Majesty desired that his late mother's wish should be fulfilled, and that in spite of his natural desires at the time when their Royal Highnesses started to keep them with him, yet he determined that the late Queen's wish should be given effect to, and that their Royal Highnesses should visit the Commonwealth of Australia and the other colo- nies. We have had the great pleasure during the last month of receiving them here, and we accepted their visit, I am sure, quite apart from other considerations, as the evidence of a sin- cere desire on the part of His Majesty, and through him on the part of his late mother, that their visit should be regarded as the sym- bol and emblem of a united Empire, and that this fact should be brought home to and realised by every one of His Majesty's subjects in every part of his vast dominions-not from any sense of personal empire, but that the essence of true sovereignty, the true kinship of a united people, should be realised in the most personal way pos- sible by every one of His Majesty's subjects in these remote parts of his dominions. I know the Council will pass this resolution without any controversy, and pass it in the sense in which it is proposed, with a loving recollection of the Queen that has gone and a full sympathy with the responsibilities of the King that has come. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN .- Sir, in seconding the motion which has been proposed by my honourable friend, I am only expressing the feeling of this Council in saying how deeply it sympathized with the thrill of sorrow which went through the whole civilised world at the news of the death of the Queen. It is needless now to speak of the virtues of Her Majesty, or of the dignity and strength with which she re- presented her country during her reign ; while throughout the Empire the influence of her character and of her sympathy with all her sub- jects was deep and far-reaching. Those who have lived through the reign of Her Majesty-or the greater part of it-must have felt that the reign of the Queen has really brought back to the British people and to the British Empire that sense of chivalrous loyalty which had slumbered for a time. The cry wrung from a great orator at the end of the last century, that the age of chivalry was gone, could not be repeated now. The late Queen evoked that spirit from every race under her rule. She has shown through her long reign that a country which enjoys greater freedom and truer self-government than any nominal republic in the world can be represented among the nations with a dignity that is not possible under any other form of government. And we are glad that the representation of our country is being 
<page>4</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788238&seq=32</url>
taken up by one who has been brought up under such noble auspices, and who represents the traditions of the past and the hopes of the future. We are glad, too, that he has adopted a style and title which reminds us of the his- toric glories of England, connecting our present life with the annals of the past. We hope and we trust that for a long time to come he will represent as loyally as the late Queen the honour of the English race throughout the world. Sir, I am sure that this Legislature, which has sorrowed with the whole Empire on the death of the Queen, will have the same feeling of loyalty for her son and her repre- sentative as long as he lives. The Hon. Captain BAILLIE .- Sir, I might add a few words to what has been already so ably said by the mover and the seconder of the resolution. As an old soldier, and one who has served Her Majesty in this colony for over forty years, I think I may be able to express a few words of sympathy at the loss sustained in the death of our late Queen-mother. She was the mother of the nation. I remember when , the Crimean war broke out I was at Chat- ham, when she visited the hospital there, and showed much interest and sympathy for the wounded men who had been serving her ; and, consequent upon her close scrutiny of the hospital accommodation, she sent a letter to Lord Panmure, Minister for War, desiring that proper accommodation should be provided for her soldiers. She will always live in the me- mory of her dutiful and loving soldiers. She always sympathized in our griefs ; and widows  and orphans of her dead soldiers especially have read many letters penned by her own hand to those unfortunate in losing their breadwinners. I think it is only right that we should express #cc-zero to our reigning sovereign our sympathy with His Majesty in the great loss that the country has sustained. I remember the welfare of the people at the time I was a boy, and you may say that the lot of the working-classes especially have improved in many ways during the late reign, owing to the wise legislation passed during that period. We now have laws which we may say are an example to the world. Our legislation has been an advance in many re- spects on that of other European nations and of other parts of the world. I will not say any more, but, as one who has served Her Majesty so long, I think it has been my duty on this occasion to say what I have. The Hon. Mr. SHRIMSKI. - I trust the Council will permit me to speak on this occa- sion. As a naturalised subject of Her late Majesty, I say that during her long reign the Jewish people under the British flag, both in England and in the colonies, have received the same freedom and liberty as British-born sub- jects, and I can say, on behalf of my core- ligionists and myself, that her memory will always be revered and regarded with lasting gratitude by those who have received these benefits during her reign. Motion agreed to. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- I beg to move, That the Hon. the Speaker present the address to His Excellency the Governor, respect- fully requesting him lo forward it to the Secre- tary of State for the Colonies for submission to His Majesty. Motion agreed to. The Council adjourned at half-past three o'clock p.m. ## HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Monday, 1st July, 1901. Opening of Session- Swearing - in of Members - Northern Maori District - Resignation of Mem- bers-Death of Queen Victoria. Mr. SPEAKER took the chair at half-past two o'clock. PRAYERS. ## OPENING OF SESSION. The following message was delivered by the Acting Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod : "The Legislative Councillors, authorised by virtue of His Excellency's Commission, desire the immediate attendance of this honourable House in the Legislative Council Chamber, to hear the Commission read." Accordingly, Mr. SPEAKER, accompanied by members and preceded by the Serjeant-at- Arms, proceeded to the Legislative Council; and, the Commission having been read, re- turned. SWEARING-IN OF MEMBERS. Mr. SPEAKER said that, with respect to the oath of allegiance to King Edward VII., he had received the following letter from the Colonial Secretary :- "Colonial Secretary's Office, Wellington, 1st July, 1901. " :formula: have the honour to inform you that it is considered proper and desirable that the oath of allegiance to His Majesty the King should be administered to all members of both Houses of the General Assembly at the com- mencement of the present session, being the first session held since His Majesty's accession. " His Excellency the Governor will be pre- pared to administer the said oath of allegiance to you at Government House at noon this day, and I enclose herewith a warrant under the hand of His Excellency, authorising you to administer the said oath to members of the House of Representatives. - I have, &c., "J. G. WARD. "The Hon. Sir George Maurice O'Rorke, Kt., Speaker of the House of Representatives, Wel- lington." The enclosure was as follows :- "RANFURLY, Governor. "To all to whom these presents shall come : Greeting. "In pursuance of the authority in me vested by the Constitution Act, and of all other autho- rities me enabling in this behalf, I, Uchter 
<page>5</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788238&seq=33</url>
John Mark, Earl of Ranfurly, Governor of the Colony of New Zealand, do hereby authorise the Honourable Sir George Maurice O Rorke, Knight, Speaker of the House of Representa- tives of the said colony, to administer to mem- bers of the said House of Representatives the oath or affirmation of allegiance to His Majesty the King. " Given under the hand of His Excellency the Right Honourable Uchter John Mark, Earl of Ranfurly, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George ; Governor and Commander-in-Chief in and over His Majesty s Colony of New Zealand and its Dependencies, and issued under the seal of the said colony at the Government House, at Welling- ton, this first day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hun- dred and one. "J. G. WARD." He proposed to administer the oath in the usual way - alphabetically - calling up four members at a time. The oath was administered to members ac- cordingly. NORTHERN MAORI DISTRICT. Mr. SPEAKER read a letter from the Clerk of Writs announcing the election of Mr. Hone Hexe for the Northern Maori District. RESIGNATIONS OF MEMBERS. Mr. SPEAKER read a letter from Mr. Charles Lewis, resigning his seat as a member for the City of Christchurch. Mr. SPEAKER also read a letter from Mr. George Hutchison, resigning his seat as member for Patea. ## DEATH OF QUEEN VICTORIA. Mr. SPEAKER read the following message from His Excellency the Governor :- ### " RANFURLY, Governor. "It is the painful duty of the Governor to inform the House of Representatives that amidst the lamentations of Her subjects and the grief of the civilised world, our late Most Gracious Sovereign Queen Victoria departed this life on Tuesday, the 22nd day of January, 1901, between the hours of six and seven of the clock in the evening, at Osborne House, in the Isle of Wight. " Her late Majesty was succeeded by Her eldest son, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, who in England, on the 24th day of January, 1001, and in New Zealand on the 28th day of the same month, was proclaimed King by the style and title of Edward the Seventh. " The Proclamation as made in New Zealand was recorded in the Gazette of the 4th day of February, 1901, in the following terms :- ". PROCLAMATION. " ' WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God to call to His mercy our late Sovereign Lady Queen Victoria, of Blessed and Glorious Memory, by whose decease the Imperial Crown of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and all other Her late Majesty s dominions, is solely and rightfully come to the High and Mighty Prince Edward : Now, therefore, We, Uchter John Mark, Earl of Ranfurly, the Governor of the Colony of New Zealand, Richard John Seddon, a Member of Her late Majesty's Privy Council, Joseph George Ward, Acting-Premier of the said colony, and the Members of the Executive Council of the said colony, assisted by Members of both Houses of the General Assembly. Judges, Magistrates, and Officers of Courts, Ministers of Religion, Mayors, Chairmen, and Members of Local Bodies, and numerous other representa- tive European and Maori citizens here present, do now hereby, with one full voice and consent of tongue and heart, publish and proclaim that the High and Mighty Prince Albert Edward is now, by the death of our late Sovereign of Happy and Glorious Memory, become our only lawful and rightful Liege Lord Edward the Seventh, by the Grace of God, King of the United King- dom of Great Britain and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Emperor of India, Supreme Lord in and over the Colony. of New Zealand and its dependencies, to whom we do acknowledge all faith and constant obedience with all hearty and humble affection, beseeching God, by whom kings and queens do reign, to bless the Royal Prince Edward the Seventh with long and happy years to reign over us. Given at Wellington, in the Colony of New Zealand, this twenty-eighth day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and one. "' RANFURLY. ". R. J. SEDDON. "J. G. WARD. ". W. C. WALKER. "' WM. HALL-JONES. C. H. MILLS. "' DUDLEY ALEXANDER, Captain. "'GOD SAVE THE KING !' " On the day of the accession to the Throne, His Majesty the King was pleased to make a declaration in the following terms :- "'Your Royal Highnesses, My Lords, and Gentlemen,-This is the most painful occasion on which I shall ever be called upon to address you. "My first and melancholy duty is to announce to you the death of my beloved mother, the Queen, and I know how deeply you, the whole nation, and I think I may say the whole world, sympathize with me in the irreparable loss we have all sustained. " I need hardly say that my constant endea- vour will be always to walk in her footsteps. In undertaking the heavy load which now devolves upon me, I am fully determined to be a Consti- tutional Sovereign in the strictest sense of the word, and, as long as there is breath in my body, to work for the good and amelioration of my people. ". I have resolved to be known by the name of "Edward," which has been borne by six of my ancestors. In doing so, I do not undervalue the 
<page>6</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788238&seq=34</url>
name of " Albert," which I inherit from my ever- to-be-lamented, great, and wise father, who, by universal consent, is, I think, deservedly known by the name of " Albert the Good," and I desire that his name should stand alone. "'In conclusion, I trust to Parliament and the nation to support me in the arduous duties which now devolve upon me by inheritance, and to which I am determined to devote my whole strength during the remainder of my life.' "The Governor is fully assured that the House of Representatives shares in the deep sorrow which has befallen His Majesty and the Empire by the lamented death of His Majesty's mother, the late Queen, who, through the sixty-four years of her reign-the longest and most bene- ficent in the history of our race-endeared her- self to her people by her manifold excellences and virtues. " The Governor is also assured that the mem- bers of the House of Representatives will testify their loyalty to the Throne and person of His Most Gracious Majesty by taking the oath of allegiance before entering upon the ordinary business of the country. This has already been done by Mr. Speaker. " Government House, Wellington, 1st July, 1901." Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move, That a respectful address be pre- sented to His Majesty, to assure His Majesty that this House deeply laments the death of our late Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, whose name and reign will ever be held in lasting remembrance by Her late Majesty's  sorrowing and loving subjects. This House respectfully begs to submit to His Majesty its congratulations on his accession to the Throne, and assures His Majesty of the House's loyal  use#cc-zero attachment to his person, and desires to pray for His Majesty the glory of a reign to be dis- tinguished by peace, prosperity, and a general advance in the social and economic conditions of his subjects. Sir, when the sad intelligence reached the colonies of the death of our good and gracious Queen Victoria, of blessed memory, a wail of grief went forth not only from her be- reaved subjects, but also, I would say, from the civilised world. Sir, we, the bereaved sons of a departed mother -- for New Zealand was the first colony established during her reign, and as a colony it has prospered much during that reign - and as true, loyal, and loving subjects, have felt keenly the loss sustained. Sir, although our good and gracious Queen has passed away -her remains lie in Frogmore, and her terres- trial throne has been surrendered she has gone where all will be mercifully and wisely judged ; and we feel that it is only a temporary surrender, and that she will be awarded a crown of glory, and her place will be amongst the blessed. Sir, during her reign great advantages arose to mankind, and to depict her spotless life and character, and her many virtues, would be almost like attempting to paint the rata-flower. or the beautiful and pure white flower of Kumara, or the lily of the valley. Deeds, not words, redound to the memory of our good and gracious sovereign, whose irrepar- able loss we mourn. One and all must ad- mit that mankind itself profited greatly during that beneficent reign. When, Sir, we look at the conditions existing sixty-four years ago and the conditions now obtaining we must admit that there is a better condition of man- kind, that good has been inspired, and that the best wishes of those having only at heart the benefit of their fellow-men have been in the fullest granted. Under these circumstances, Sir, we, the members of this House, join in offering condolences to His Majesty and to the Royal Family, and we join with others of the nation in that grief, and that sorrow, and that irreparable loss which we have been called upon to bear. As Empress, Queen, wife, mother, and widow our late good and gracious Majesty Queen Victoria has shown an example to the world. It was not altogether as a ruler that the brightness and brilliancy of her reign is so appa- rent, but it was in her many virtues, and in her great fortitude, and in her every endeavour to promote the well-being and happiness of those over whom she ruled. Laying apart, then, that credit to her as a monarch-and be it said here that, as monarch, she stands pre-eminent, holding almost first place in the world-when you realise the fact that she was a woman, I say all the greater tribute to her blessed memory. Sir, we are not alone. We are joining in a general regret at the death of our blessed Sovereign. Hers might be said to be a reign of peace, and we all deplore that at the very end the clang of war, with its sorrows, its anguish, and its difficulties, obtained. But we must not forget this: that the honour of our nation was ever the great care of that ruler who has passed away; and much as we regret the condition of affairs at the end still we can only say that, though gone from us, her memory will ever be revered. and wherever the English language is spoken, wherever her good works have been known, those of the future, as well as of the present, will join in paying that tribute to her good works and to her memory which they so well and worthily deserve. Sir, whilst moving this resolution on the death of our beloved Sovereign, it would be well that we should offer to His Majesty Edward the Seventh our loyal and cordial greetings on his acces- sion to the Throne. The worthy son of a good mother, we can, I say without hesitation, ex- pect that the reign of His Majesty will be cha- racterized by a completion of the works so well begun in the reign of Her late Majesty Victoria. That the commencement has been all that could be desired I think is conveyed in the words which you have read in the message to-day. Under the most trying, sad, and painful cir- cumstances, our King first speaks to his people thus :- "My first and melancholy duty is to announce to you the death of my beloved mother, the Queen, and I know how deeply you, the whole nation, and I think I may say the whole world, sympathize with me in the irreparable loss we have all sustained. " I need hardly say that my constant endea- vour will be always to walk in her footsteps. 
<page>7</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788238&seq=35</url>
In undertaking the heavy load which now devolves upon me, I am fully determined to be a Constitutional sovereign in the strictest sense of the word, and, as long as there is breath in my body, to work for the good and amelioration of my people." These words struck home; they struck a sympathetic chord in many hearts throughout the Empire, and there was only one voice, only one response : "Amen ; do your duty, and you will have the support of your people ; your burdens will be lightened so far as it is in their power possibly to lighten them." And then we have a proof of the sincerity and the desire to carry out to its fullest extent the pledge given by His Gracious Majesty. Our late good and gracious Queen had given her consent to the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York visiting the colonies. She, no doubt remembering what had been done and the sacri- fices made, in her own good way thought she would do something to show that the services rendered were greatly appreciated ; and, at a time when he needed the support of his loved ones, when filled with anguish, our King said, "The wishes of my mother, the good and gracious Queen Victoria, shall be given effect to. I must sacrifice myself and my feelings : go my only son, go my only daughter, and visit those of our good subjects far away." Sir, the visit has been paid, and the addresses that have been given have come spontaneously from all ; they have breathed loyalty and affection to the Royal person and Throne. They are, Sir, the addresses that convey the feelings of the people of this colony. We, as' the representatives of the colony, heartily condole with His Majesty,  and at the same time beg to assure him of our loyal and heartfelt and universal support. Let him never forget that, whether ill or prosperity obtains, it will be our duty as it will be our  use#cc-zero pleasure to assist him in promoting the well- being and the strengthening of the great Empire to which we are all so proud to belong. Sir, so long as life lasts we will, with him, endeavour to ameliorate the condition of the people and pro- mote their happiness, and so create a higher and brighter civilisation. Sir, I move the re- solution, and I feel assured it will receive the unanimous support of the House. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay). - Mr. Speaker, historians have commemorated and poets sung of the virtues of Victoria. It would be futile indeed, then, that I should endeavour, by any poor words of mine, to add a tribute to her memory, or try to gild such refined gold. In all the phases of her life the veneration of the civilised world was given to her. As a beneficent sovereign, none, perhaps, in the his- tory of the world has left fame so imperishable as hers. I will quote but two lines of poetry to try and express the feelings of her peo; le :- Ne'er to those Chambers, where the mighty rest Si ice their foundation. came a nobler guest. But the good Queen Victoria did has not died with her. The example, by a person in so exalted a position, of pure life and devotion to duty never is lost to a country, and encourages and stimulates their successors to deserve the brightest glory they can win-the love of those they govern. It has been said, "Never was there great man who had not a great mother." His Majesty King Edward the Seventh's acces- sion is for his people most auspicious. He has succeeded to a glorious heritage ; he had before him a grand example, and, above all these, the inestimable advantage of a great and noble mother. I feel sure that the whole energies of his life will be devoted to following the paths of one who was so lofty and so pure as was Her late Majesty Queen Victoria. Motion agreed to. On the motion of Mr. SEDDON, it was re- solved, That Mr. Speaker present the address just now passed to His Excellency the Go- vernor, respectfully requesting him to forward it to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, for submission to His Majesty. The House adjourned at half-past three o'clock p.m. 