<url>https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/sittings/1901/mar/27</url>
HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Wednesday, 27th March, 1901.
TOOK THE OATH.
One other Member took and subscribed the Oath.
PETITIONS.
BEER BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Wallingford: Saffron Walden; Farington: Bawdsey; Sutton; Hodnet; Great Wratting; Snaith; Leicester; Hampshire (two); Salisbury; Ross; Shifnal; Wilmington; Upton Bishop; Sleaford; Monmouthshire; Lincoln; Uppingham; Stafford shire; Thaxted; Exmouth; Cirencester; Loddon and Clavering; Rutland; Worcestershire; Market Harborough; and Manorbier; to lie upon the Table.
BERWICKSHIRE COUNTY TOWN BILL.
Petition from Greenlaw, against; to lie upon the Table.
COAL MINES (EMPLOYMENT) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Ireland Pit; West Kiveton; Norton Hill; Foxcote; Blaekwell; Braysdown; Farrington; Camerton; Kilmersdon; Timsbury; Huish; Writhlington; Springfield; Bishop Sutton; and Old Mills; to lie upon the Table.
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION (HIGHER GRADE AND EVENING CONTINUATION SCHOOLS)
Petition from Darwen for alteration of Law; to lie upon the Table.
HOSPITALS (EXEMPTION FROM RATES) BILL.
Petition from Dundee, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES OFFICERS' SUPERANNUATION BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Worcester; and St. Mellons; to lie upon the Table.
MARRIAGE WITH A DECEASED WIFE'S SISTER BILL.
Petition from Linlithgow, in favour; to lie upon the Table.
MINES (EIGHT HOURS) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from West Kiveton; Ireland Pit; Blackheath: Rowley Regis; Whiteheath; Springfield; Writhlington: Camerton: Timsbury; Blackwell; Foxcote; Kilmersdon; Huish; Norton Hill; Braysdowne; Old Mills; and Farrington; to lie upon the Table.
ROMAN CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY IN IRELAND.
Petitions against establishment, from Leven; and Coatbridge: to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Kendal; Leeds (two); Henley-on Thames (three); Wakefield; Browney; Putney; Darwen (two): Wiltshire; Queen's Park; Wigan; Stokenchurch: Ashford; Fleetwood (two); Bristol; Rams bottom; Birdwaal; Willesden: Walsall; Bloxwich; Smethwick; Eastbourne; Whiteinch: Southampton; Longridge: Ashton-on-Ribble: Preston: Lytham; Radcliffe; Halifax; Rainhill; Wiston; and Nantwich; to lie upon the Table.
SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO CHILDREN (SCOTLAND) BILL.
Petitions in favour, from Millport; Edzell; Partick; Edinburgh; Durness; Govan; and Dumfries; to lie upon the Table.
RETURNS, REPORTS, ETC.
LAND TRANSFER ACT, 1897.
Paper [presented 26th March]; to be printed. [No. 100.]
BRISTOL CORPORATION (DOCKS AND RAILWAYS, ETC.) BILL [Lords].
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 26th March; Mr. Gerald Balfour]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 101.]
GLASGOW AND SOUTH WESTERN RAILWAY BILL.
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 26th March; Mr. Gerald Balfour;] to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 102.]
NORTH EASTERN RAILWAY BILL.
Return presented, relative thereto [ordered 26th March; Mr. Herald Balfour; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 103.]
ELECTRIC LIGHTING PROVISIONAL ORDERS (No. 1) BILL.
Return, presented relative thereto [ordered 26th March; Mr. Gerald Balfour;] to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 104.]
FACTORY AND WORKSHOP ACTS (MANUFACTURE OF EARTHENWARE AND CHINA).
Copy presented, of Amended Special Rides for the Manufacture of Earthenware and China [by Act]; to lie upon the Table.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (NAVY VOTES).
Copy presented, of Treasury Minute, dated 22nd March 1901, authorising the temporary application of surpluses on certain Navy Votes for the year 1900&#x2013;1901 to meet excesses on other Navy Votes for the same year [pursuant to Resolution of the House of 4th March 1879]; to lie upon the Table.
PRIVATE LEGISLATION PROCEDURE (SCOTLAND) ACT, 1899.
Copy presented, of Amending General Order for the regulation of proceedings under and in pursuance of the Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act, 1899 [by Act]; to lie upon the Table, and to be printed. [No. 105.]
PRIVATE BILL BUSINESS.
PRIVATE BILLS (GROUP A).
Mr. Hargreaves Brown reported from the Committee on Croup A of Private Bills, that the parties opposing the Thames Piers and River Service Bill had stated that the evidence of Captain L. W. E. Bowen, Harbour Master, Temple Pier, was essential to their case; and it having been proved that his attendance could not be procured without the intervention of the House, he had been instructed to move that the said Captain L. W. E. Bowen do attend the said Committee to-morrow, at Twelve if the clock.
Ordered. That Captain L. W. E. Bowen do attend the Committee on Croup A of Private Bills to-morrow, at Twelve of the clock.
PRIVATE BILLS (GROUP D).
Mr Schwann reported from the Committee on Group D of Private Bills, that the parties promoting the Wells Water Bill had stated that the evidence of Joseph Clapton Davis was essential to their case; and it having been proved that his attendance could not be procured without the intervention of the House, he had been instructed to move that the said Joseph Clapton Davis do attend the said Committee to-morrow, at Twelve of the clock.
Ordered, That Joseph Clapton Davis do attend the Committee on Group D of Private Bills to-morrow, at Twelve of the clock.
ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
QUESTIONS.
There were eight questions on the Paper. The first addressed to the Financial Secretary to the Treasury, was, by request, postponed. The others were addressed to the Chief Secretary for Ireland and the Secretary of State for War, neither of whom was in his place.
MR. O'DOHERTY (Donegal, N.) put a question to the Secretary of State for War.
*MR. SPEAKER: There is no object in calling on the other questions, as the Ministers to whom they are addressed are not present.
MR. O'DOHERTY: The Minister to whom I put this question is in the precincts of the House.
*MR. SPEAKER: That may be so; but he is not here.
MR. JAMES LOWTHER (Kent, Thanet): I think the Chief Secretary is about the House somewhere.
*MR. SPEAKER: I can take no notice of that; but I can call on the hon. Member to put the question if he wishes it.
MR. O'DOHERTY then put another question, but no reply was made. He complained of the absence of Ministers.
*MR. SPEAKER: The right hon. Gentleman is not here, and I cannot enter into a discussion as to why he is not here.
MR. FLAVIN (Kerry, N.):.My hon. and learned and gallant colleague the Member for East Clare is very anxious to have his question answered.
CONSOLIDATED FUND (No. 1) BILL.
Order for Committee read.
Clause 1:;
MR. CALDWELL (Lanarkshire. Mid) asked why the usual course had not been followed of specifying separately the particular year to which the sums voted were appropriated.
THE FINANCIAL SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY (Mr. AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN, Worcestershire, E.): This is a Consolidated Fund and not an Appropriation Bill. It is only on the Appropriation Bill at the end of the session that the sums are specifically ear-marked.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to.
Clause 4:;
MR. CALDWELL objected to the title. The Bill was really the first "Consolidated Fund Bill." and not the "Consolidated Fund First Bill."
[The hon. Member moved an Amendment to this effect, but it was negatived.]
Bill reported without Amendment; to be read a third time tomorrow.
BEER BILL.
[SECOND READING.]
Order for Second Reading read.
*MR. PURVIS (Peterborough): I rise Sir, to move the Second Reading of this Bill to amend the law relating to the manufacture and sale of beer. The
imperfection of the existing law has lately been brought before the notice of everyone in so startling a manner by what has happened from drinking poisonous beer, and the remedy is so obvious, if I may say so, that notwithstanding the Amendment. I should have felt it unnecessary to do more than barely state the object of the Bill, did I not remember that two Bills with a similar object have already, within the past not very many years, been considered by this House, without the desired result; and that this though like is vet so unlike them that I. must needs explain as briefly as I can the method of this Bill, whereby I trust that it will meet with better fortune than was ultimately theirs. The Bills of 1886 and 1896 were introduced by the hon. Baronet the Member for Sudbury, whose devotion and public spirit have inseparably associated his name with this question, and his unflagging attention, and that of many others bestowed on the present measure will now, I trust, be suitably rewarded by the realisation of their patriotic desire that everyone throughout the United Kingdom shall have a glass of pure beer when he asks for it.
I will give just so much of the history of this matter as is necessary to explain the immediate business in hand. For generations down to the latter part of the 18th century, beer had been a liquor, old, mature, and mellow, brewed after the barley harvest, from malt and hops, in the mild autumnal weather of October. But the 19th century arrived with all its cheap methods, some good, some bad, and Parliament had to interfere. So from 1802 till 1847 only barley malt, hops, and yeast were allowed in the brewing of beer, save for one slight exception, hardly indeed a real exception, that brown sugar for colouring was allowed from 1811 to 1817. But in 1847, after forty-five years of security, was sown the seed of all our woes in this respect; for in that year a concession was made to the woeful importunity of our old friend the West Indian planter, and sugar was then first allowed to have a real component share in the brewing of beer. But sugar was the signal for an invasion of imitations. Sugar can be made from other things besides the West Indian cane. It is only a matter of starch. Dapper
chemists with their glucose were followed jauntily by pseudo-scientists with countless substitutes, rejoicing in such a list of fearsome names as would have made Quintilian stare and gasp. When the burden of all this began to grow too grievous to be borne, there arose a doughty champion of reform, the hon. Baronet, who took the field in that behalf and brought in his Bills of 1886 and 1896. He proposed to turn back, make the law as it was before 1847, and suffer no drink to bear the name of "beer" save only what was brewed from malt and hops.
And herein lies the cardinal difference between those Bills and this;for here I leave, history and betake myself to the present Bill. Its main object is to secure to the buyer a glass of beer brewed from malt, hops and yeast if he asks for it. But to enable him to do so we had to give it a name. Well, as the House is aware, outside the walls of Parliament, from, all sorts and conditions of men, county councils, municipal councils, boards of guardians, trade and labour leagues;has arisen a cry for pure beer, and we who had to frame the Bill were much exercised in our minds whether we should not take that name for what we call in our Bill by the modest name of "Malt Beer." But a sense;perhaps too strict;of justice restrained us. The name "beer" has now for over fifty years been shared in common by malt beer and that brewed with substitutes for malt and we felt that the name "Pure Beer," while it would truly denote our beer would yet connote offensively that all others were impure, whereas we do not seek to claim any monopoly, express or implied, of the name beer. This meets more than one objection to the Bill of 1896. It was then argued by our opponents that several industries engaged in making legitimate substitutes would be ruined if the Bill passed into law, and the right hon. Gentleman the Chancellor of the Exchequer declared that the revenue would suffer if he could not tax as beer any but malt beer. Well, we have changed all that by Clause 1. We advocates of barley malt are still the same but not the same. Sir John Cutler had a pair of black worsted stockings which his mild darned so often with silk that they became a pair of silk stockings. It
is no longer monopoly that we seek, it is Free Trade for all. The enterprising makers of substitutes may go merrily on save in so far as malt beer shall openly compete with them, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer and his revenue shall not be interfered with.
Clause2.prohibiting the use of hop substitutes, is for the safety of the consumer of beer, and is necessary from the great danger of their use, and the extreme difficulty of detection. Hop substitutes cannot plead in their defence the use and wont of fifty years ago like malt substitutes. On one occasion;twenty years ago;in a time of acute hop famine, they attempted and failed to take a permanent place among the constituents of the mash tun, and it is admitted on all hands that to allow them would be most hurtful to the public, but that their prohibition will hurt nobody, because hops virtually hold the field against all substitutes.
Coming now to Clauses 3 and 4, as to marking and labelling of cask and bottle and tap, and putting up notice in the bar room, it is an undisputed function of Government to take precautions against deception, which a buyer cannot take for himself. The evidence against this marking and labelling given to the Beer Committee was all on the assumption that there might have to be ten or more different labels required, and so chaos and confusion would reign supreme at the public-house bar. but this Bill proposes only two labels corresponding with the two names in Clause 1, a simple division by which there is no beer which does not fall under one or other alternative. Thus the spectre of chaos and confusion is effectively laid, and as to any slur or stigma on part-malt beer, if as some maintain it is as good as malt beer, why should the label be deemed any disadvantage? If it is better or more to the public taste the label will be a distinct advantage. A lady had given to her a barrel of small beer, and she asked the butler how it were best to keep it. "Well, ma'am," was his reply, "the best way to keep a barrel of small beer is to place a barrel of strong beer alongside of it." All we ask is to give the buyer a chance to judge for himself, and then to leave him to do as he likes. And this I may at once say is also our reason for the eighth clause of the
Bill. That clause aims at giving a man this same chance of getting a glass of malt beer even where the tied house system prevails, where at present he is fain to take what is offered him or go may he a day's journey, to a less tied house locality. My hon. friend the Member for West Nottingham has an Amendment on the Paper as to tied houses. Of course, he knows best what In- is about, but I hope he will forgive me for saying it seems somewhat wide of the mark as raising an academic discussion, on a most important question I allow, but more suited in its form for Tuesday afternoons than for the Second Reading of such a Hill as this with an immediate object in view*. So then coming back to Clause 5, requiring registers to be kept by brewer and dealer of beer sent out and received, it sets up what is called in the apt language of Bentham, pre-appointed evidence based on the right inherent in Society to ward off wilful or accidental injury to itself by antecedent precautions, and this clause while no impediment to getting the article required will be a very considerable hindrance to improper sales of what is but a disguised imitation of the article required.
Such are the main features of this Bill. It is not protection, but is plainly in the interests of the consumer which is the main doctrine of Free Trade. It gives warning to the buyer, and then leaves him to do as he pleases. Except the notice in Clause 4, sub-section 2 to be posted up at the bar of the seller of part-malt beer, it imposes no obligation on the brewer or seller of part-malt beer which it does not impose on the brewer or seller of malt beer. It has been said why not leave the whole matter to the Food and Drug Acts which already make it punishable to sell to the prejudice of the purchaser "any article of food which is not of the nature, substance, and quality demanded by the purchaser." But in the ease of beer, this would mean an expensive, elaborate, and even questionable chemical analysis, whereas this Bill chiefly works by what may be termed mechanical plain ready means of prevention and detection; and to leave things as they are because of the liability to punishment under the Food and Drug Acts, is not more reasonable than to sleep with the front door unbolted because a burglar
can be punished under the common law when he happens to be caught. Then again it may be argued that nothing should be done until the Royal Com mission has made its Report on the subject of arsenic in beer and other articles of food and drink. But for our purpose the reference to the Commission is at once too wide in its scope and too narrow in its object. It may, for ought I know, be very useful for a Royal Commission to go roving at large over the whole field of a reference De omnibus rebus et quibusdam aliis; but it will settle nothing and discover nothing of actual preventive value as regards beer now that universal attention has been rivetted in so tragic a fashion on the special form of danger from which the public has suffered. I imagine that the coroner's inquests have rid us for some time to come of arsenic from pyrites; but when Hercules cut off the Hydra's head, two new ones grew up in its place. There are other baneful things besides arsenic, and our last state may be worse than the first, be the Report of the Commission what it will as to arsenic, if this Bill do not pass.
Sir, I am already too much indebted to the patience of the House, or I might have shown that this is a temperance Bill, for temperance prevails in the countries where only malt beer is drunk. I might have shown that this is a brewers' Bill, for if confidence in British beer be not restored Bavarian beer will take its place. I might have shown that this is an agriculturist Bill as increasing the demand for barley; but it is time to furl my sail and make an end. Now that we are brought face to face with the stern facts;after the deaths which have occurred from poisoned beer;after the widespread sickness and suffering from poisoned beer, after the public has appealed to us in daily petitions to this House for protection from this pestilence that walketh in darkness, I maintain that the present state of things ought not to be suffered to continue for an hour. And so my task is done. If I have in anywise shown this Bill to be worthy of support, J have done as I desired. If. as doubtless is the fact, I have in many ways come short of what is due to the House and the subject, I trust it will be considered the fault of the advocate and not imputed to the cause which he has advocated. I beg to move.
Motion made, and Question proposed, "That the Bill be now read a second time.";(Mr. Purvis.)
*COLONEL MILWARD (Warwickshire, Stratford-upon-Avon): In rising to move the rejection of this Bill I desire first to say one or two words upon a personal matter. I wish to explain that I am in no way interested in brewing, neither have any commercial interest in the sugar industry. I have never been the holder of any brewery shares, and I have never as been a guest at a licensed victuallers' dinner. I can, therefore, claim to approach this subject from an entirely independent point of view.
I oppose this Bill for four reasons. First, because it is not a Hill to prevent arsenical poisoning in beer; secondly, it is contrary to the interests of British agriculturists; thirdly, it creates a law which the executive cannot administer; and, fourthly, it favours the foreign as against the British producer. With regard to arsenical poisoning, I did hope that this Bill would have given a strong lead to the House. Undoubtedly the great trouble which has arisen recently in the North has been due to the sugar which found its way into the beer. But, as a matter of fact, sugar adulteration has nothing whatever to do with this Hill. We use sugar in almost everything we eat and drink. We have it in our tea and our coffee, and even hams are cured with it, and therefore it is impossible to say that sugar is not a proper constituent of ordinary food. But the question is, have we a right to know what it is we are eating and drinking? As a matter of fact, we eat and drink a good many things of the constituents of which we know nothing. We drink, for instance, aerated waters, soda, lithia, and seltzer, and I do not suppose that many Members of this House can tell us the constituents of these waters. I do not see. indeed, what particular object there is in making known the exact constituents of beer, except it be to restore public confidence. We know that the poisoning in the North arose from sugar supplied by a particular firm, and was due to the sulphuric acid with which that sugar was treated. The hon. Gentleman who moved the Second
Reading of this Bill said that for the last fifty years sugar bad been admitted to be a constituent of beer. Now it takes two forms. There is the invert sugar and the glucose sugar. The invert sugar is made from sugar cane treated with sulphuric acid; the glucose sugar is obtained from maize, sago, and tapioca, also treated with sulphuric acid, which, of course is afterwards got rid of. If there be arsenic in the sulphuric acid, it is possible that it passes into the invert or glucose sugar. and if impure sulphuric acid is used it is quite possible that the impurity passes into the sugar. I do not wish to go into the history of the firm implicated in this matter. I believe that Messrs. Bostock are now in liquidation. The business was originally founded by Mr. Bostock, and eventually became, under one of the most objectionable kinds of management;the kind so prevalent nowadays;a limited liability company, in which everything devolves upon the manager, whose duty it is to make the directors' fees, his own salary, and possibly a profit for the shareholders. If as has been suggested, there was gross carelessness in the manufacture of the sugar, and if that gross carelessness resulted in widespread disease and death, I cannot understand why the criminal law was not put into operation. If gross carelessness led to many deaths surely it was a subject which ought to he touched by the criminal law and I cannot understand the failure of the Government to take steps in the matter. This Bill, unfortunately, does not deal in any way with that question. If the public in our great towns look, as they are looking, for a pure beer Bill, a Bill which will secure that the beer supplied to them is free from arsenical poisoning, they will be disappointed with this measure, which does not in the slightest degree guarantee their safety. The same materials may still be used, call them by what name you like. There is to be the same invert sugar, which may be perfectly pure; there is to be the glucose, which ought to be pure; but there is not the slightest protection to the public in a single line of this Bill. I should like to read a few words which Dr. Reid, the sanitary officer for the county of Staffordshire,
gave in his evidence before the Royal Commission now sitting, He said;
"As preventive measures he would recommend (1) that no glucose or invert sugar should be made with sulphuric acid unless it was made from sulphur and not from pyrites, and that the brewers should have a guarantee to that effect; (2) that the Inland Revenue should instruct Excise Officers to see that such guarantees were given, and to collect samples of brewing materials for analysis; and (3) that additional powers for local authorities to seize contaminated beers should be given."
If the Bill had proceeded on these lines I could have understood it hut there is not a, single word in it which would strengthen the hands of local authorities. We must look elsewhere for the motives of this Bill. I should like to say that there are only eight makers of brewing substitutes known, and surely the Inland Revenue, which controls so many breweries, could exercise equal control over these eight firms of substitute makers. There ought to be no danger to the public when there are only so few places to which the health officers or officers of Inland Revenue would have to go in order to seek for contaminated materials. It does not strike me that the Local Government Hoard, with its army of inspectors, would find this a very difficult duty to undertake.
But, as I have said, we must look elsewhere for the motive which inspires this Bill. I feel sure that one is to raise the price of British barley. Personally, as an agricultural Member, I should not object to that if I were convinced that that would be the case. But I hold strongly opposite views. I fear that the Bill will injure the agriculturist, and in this way. It may raise the price of the highest kinds of barley, but it will lower the price of the second and medium classes which are grown throughout the country. Why was sugar introduced into beer at all, unless it was to enable, the brewer by using the second-class barleys in combination with it to produce a better, brighter, and lighter beer, which above all contained less alcohol? Sugar enables the brewer to use second class English barley, and thereby render it equal to first class English, Chilian, or Smyrna barley; and he must combine sugar with the second class English barley in order to produce a palatable beer. You may say that the English public might drink beer less sweet; but
they have a right to say what they will drink, and as the public taste has been educated to drink the sweeter liquor brewers must, it they are to use second class English barley, combine sugar with it. This Bill casts a stigma or reflection on second class beer. It creates a "malt beer" and a "part-malt beer," and the effect of passing it will be to reflect on the "part-malt beer." The effect of this undoubtedly will be that either the brewers will make more "all-malt" beer or continue to make beer according to their present methods, If they, make all-malt beer, brewers will be driven to go abroad to buy first-class barley, because they cannot buy it in large quantities in England, and in that way they will depreciate the price of second-class barleys; for brewers of "part-malt beer" will have to keep down the prices, and will pay as low a price as possible for the barleys they use.
This is very important, and to show that this is no idle contention I am afraid I must read a few extracts. When the Bill of 1895 or 1896 was before the House there were two respected Members of this House;Mr. Money-Wigram and Mr. Usborne;who spoke with great weight upon it. Indeed, it was a speech of the former Gentleman to the Agricultural Committee upstairs which induced me to hold the views I do. I have not the advantage of being able to quote from that speech, but I have here the words of Mr. Usborne, delivered in this House on the"25th March, 1896, and I will ask the attention of hon. Members to them. Mr. Usborne said;
"Their second object was to force the barley grown by their constituents into the brewer's mash tun. Would keeping sugar out of the tun force the barley into it? Most certainly not. It would force it out, by-forcing in far more foreign barley than the amount of sugar withdrawn. What was it that the operative brewer wanted in his tun, so as to get a sweet wort that would give him a healthy and complete fermentation V Why, the sun&#x0021; The, sun is the creator of all saccharine substances. He brewed himself, with slight variations for the time of year, as follows:;He used 80 per cent, of Essex barley, 10 per cent, of foreign (Smyrna), and 10 per cent of sugar. If this Kill became law he should certainly be forced, in order to get enough sun into the mash tun, to use 40 per cent, of foreign barley and 60 per cent of English."
There are a few more quotations with which I have, to trouble the House, and
they embody the views on the Bill of leading agriculturists, which were given expression to at the Central Chamber of Agriculture in February last;
"Mr. Sutton Nelthorpe, of the Lincolushire Chamber, said that although Lincolnshire was a county where a great deal of barley was grown, they felt it was a very debatable question whether the proposals would not injure the sale of second-class barley in Lincolnshire, and therefore do injury to the farmers. The Lancashire and Cheshire and the Hampshire (Mr. Jas. Stratton) representatives agreed.
"Mr. Home (Shropshire) said in his county sugar was necessary.
"Mr. Wilson (Stockton-on-Tees) said in the north of England barley grown on certain lands would be put out of use if the use of sugar was abolished altogether."
In addition to these opinions I thought it well to arm myself with opinions of the brewers, and so I put to several of them this specific question: Whether more or less Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire barley would be used if this Bill were passed, and what would be the effect upon the price? Mr. Henry Mitchell, of Mitchells and Butters, Smethwick, near Birmingham, replied;
"We can produce fine beers entirely from the barleys produced in the counties you mention, combined with 20 per cent, of finest invert sugar used in the brewing. For brewing entirely with malt we should have to select 70 per cent, of light, ripe foreign barley in combination with 30 per cent, of best eastern counties barley. The beers from this all-malt brewing would not equal in any respect the beers produced from the midland counties' barley, with the mixture of 20 per cent, of best invert sugar."
My next authority is a gentleman whose name is universally respected;I mean Sir John Holder, Bart., Chairman of Holders Brewery, Limited, Birmingham. He states;
"I may say that if we had to brew an all-malt beer we should be compelled to use almost entirely malt made from foreign barley. I cannot help thinking that the price of English medium and lower grade barley would decline in value."
Mr. Morton Lucas, High Sheriff of Warwickshire, Chairman of Lucas and Co., Limited, Leamington, says;
"Instead of buying practically all the barley we malt direct from the grower in Warickshire, we should only buy one-fifth of the quantity, the remaining four-fifths being absolutely useless unless supplemented by a certain percentage of adjuncts. Our price for this season's barley has ranged from 29s. to 35s. per quarter. For an all-malt beer everything
below 32s. would be absolutely displaced by foreign barley. The fact that there would be no demand for the cheaper soils of barley for brewing purposes could not do less than seriously depress the price of these qualities."
I think I need not trouble the House any further with these opinions. The brewers have hitherto been the friends of the farmers, I have brought forward the evidence of those who attended the Chamber of Agriculture, and also the evidence of those who buy the barley. It is for these reasons, and because I think we cannot afford to play with British agriculture in the hope of something good coming, that I am bound to say I cannot support the Bill. There are two more reasons which in my mind are absolutely fatal to the measure. The first is that no executive could administer the provisions of the Bill. I do not know whether hon. Members are aware of the fact that it is impossible to detect by analysis the difference between the beers. To brew beer you must have sugar. Whether you get the sugar from barley, or from cane sugar, or maize, or sago, it is sugar still, and the result is exactly the same. I think perhaps I ought to quote some authority in support of this. I will quote the Beer Materials Committee Report (page 7);
"We are satisfied that in the present state of scientific knowledge it is not possible to determine by chemical analysis with sufficient certainty to obtain a conviction whether malt adjuncts have or have not been used, except, perhaps, in eases where excessive proportions of such adjuncts have been employed."
If that be so I should like to ask the House to consider how the executive is to deal with this matter. What is So prevent a brewer putting half-malt beer into all-malt beer, if he desires to do so? There is no analysis to detect it. What is to prevent a publican from keeping both kinds of beer, and siphoning from one barrel into the other? I cannot believe for one moment that this House will pass a law which the executive is unable to put into operation. it would become a dead letter, and we should be stultified, and render ourselves foolish in the eyes of the country. Directly it is known outside that there is no possibility of detecting by analysis the difference between the beers;that neither by sight, colour, taste, nor chemical analysis can we find
out which beer it is;is it not perfectly certain that there will be continual and gross fraud in connection with the mixing of the two beers? The measure will be grossly unfair to the British producer as against the foreign producer. It is proposed that the House should put British producers under certain restrictions in regard to the beer they brew. We are to say that this beer should be labelled superior, and that beer inferior, that this should be labelled malt beer, and the other part-malt beer, by which, of course, it is intended to throw a reflection on the part-malt beer. You would allow the foreign producers, the brewers of Pilsener, Munich, and other beers to come in without any restrictions at all. There is no such dislike for foreign articles in this country that consumers would prefer home-manufactured beer, On the contrary, many people know that the foreign article is perfectly good and wholesome, and I am astonished when the foreign products arc admitted without any restriction that you are going to restrict in every possible way British brewers. I should have thought that we had enough foreign competition in this country already. When I see great markets like those of Germany and Austria shut to us by hostile tariffs, and when I see articles manufactured there flooding our country year by year. I think that we have quite enough of foreign competition already. My right hon. friend the Member for Sleaford has been constantly seeking to protect British agriculture. I am beginning to think that the old free trade doctrines are a little worn out. That we should in broad daylight, at the beginning of the twentieth century. pass another enactment which is to free foreigners from restrictions we put on our own producers, seems to me an extraordinary thing. It you cannot detect the ingredients of foreign beer, and if you cannot go into the brewer's place and see what be is making the beer from, the Act is grossly unfair to the British brewer. You do not know what the foreign beer which comes into this country is made from, and you cannot restrict the foreigner.
I do not think that? should sit down without, at all events, suggesting some alternative policy. Having regard to the feeling of the public at the present moment
I would suggest that the Government should take a firm stand, and see that the ingredients used in. making beer are of I quality to prevent such a terrible calamity as occurred in the north of England ever taking place in this country again. I would also suggest another practical remedy. I would suggest that the price of sugar should be its natural price, and not its bounty-fed price. The question is really one between the price of barley and the price of sugar, and sugar at its present price must win. Sugar is unnaturally cheap in this country. It is far below its natural price. Let the Government take their courage in their hands and let them agree with other nations to place sugar at its natural price, and I venture to say that the quantity of first-class and second-class barley used in brewing will increase in that way. The brewer would then no longer have the incentive he now has to use sugar. He would have every encouragement to use a, larger proportion of British barley in the manufacture of beer.
Amendment proposed;
"To leave out the word 'now,' and at the end of the Question to add the words 'upon this day six months.'";(Colonel Milward)
Question proposed, ''That the word 'now' stand part of the Question.'
MR. HEYWOOD JOHNSTONE (Sussex, Horsham) said he felt in a position of somewhat unusual difficulty and embarrassment, because he was unable to find out the object of the promoters of the Bill, and those doubts bad not been removed by the speeches of the mover and seconder of the Bill. The Bill, so far as be could make out, did not differ in the smallest degree from that which had previously been before the Mouse. There were on the back of the Bill a number of names that must carry weight in the House,, but he was bound to ask himself what was the object of the Bill and of its promoters. He thought at first, when he heard notice being given of a Bill of this character, that it was possibly for the promotion of what was known as pure beer, because he remembered there was not very long ago a movement in favour of pure beer. Pure beer was, no doubt,
a very excellent beverage, and appealed very strongly to those who consumed it. No doubt pure beer was an excellent thing to cry when they went down to the country. While the pure beer movement was going on there seemed to be dawning in England a kind of earthly paradise, having a pure and wholesome liquid which the wearied labourer might drink to his fill without fear either of the doctor or the policeman. But when they came to look at the Bill they found nothing about pure beer in it. They saw nothing to compel or encourage the manufacture of pure beer. One of the numerous arguments in favour of pure beer was that it was going to promote temperance largely, but there was not a single provision in the Bill which would secure the purity of beer, and as far as he could understand it, the Bill would have the effect of harassing the brewers and the retailers of beer by practically compelling them to manufacture or retail two articles, and it would enrich those who had to make labels, the designers of stamps, and the printers of letters one and a quarter inches square, which would have to be used in every room throughout the United Kingdom in which beer was served. It would in some degree penalise the use, so far as possible, of beer not brewed from barley malt. Perhaps that was the explanation of it all. Perhaps in some nebulous way the aim of the Bill was indirectly to raise the price of barley. Last year he attended a farmers' dinner, and the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Sleaford, who was present, delivered a speech, in which he told the farmers that ruin was staring them in the face, and that they would very shortly be in the workhouse. He subsequently soothed their feelings and comforted them with the statement that there was still a bit of blue in the sky. It almost seemed to him that the right hon. Gentleman saw in the lamentable occurrence in the north of England what he regarded as something like the interposition of Providence to raise the price of barley and bring hope; to the minds of the British barley grower.
But this Bill would do nothing to raise the price of barley in this country, be-
cause it did not prohibit the use of foreign barley or compel the use of British barley, and the brewer, like all other human beings, would get what suited him best. Mr. Thomas Usborne, speaking in the House on a similar Bill some years ago, said that he used in brewing his beer 80 per cent. of Essex barley, 10 per cent. of foreign barley, and 10 per cent. of sugar, and he observed that if the Bill then under consideration had been passed he would have been compelled to use 40 per cent. of foreign barley and 60 per cent. of English barley. That statement from a practical brewer, who understood and appreciated the subject of which he was talking, showed that this measure would not benefit the British agriculturist or send up the price of barley grown in Great Britain. After all, the value of barley was a matter of climate and a matter of sunshine. If this Bill could compel the sun to shine at the right time on the British Empire it would do a great deal more for agriculture than the provisions it contained as to the brewing of beer. In. order to benefit the farmers of East Anglia they must either prohibit the use of foreign barley altogether or put so strong a duty on foreign barley as to compel the brewer to use home-grown barley. The only effect of the Bill would be to compel the manufacturer to brew both malt and half-malt beer, and the natural result would be that care would be taken to make the half-malt beer the more palatable of the two. The brewer would take great care that it was the sort of article which would be most in demand at the places where it was sold. If it was the cheaper form to manufacture they might depend upon it that he would take care to sell the largest amount of the part-malt kind. What a, fatuous kind of legislation was that to compel two articles to be put in constant comparison and competition day by day, while there was nothing to ensure that what they held to be the least valuable was not the better of the two &#x0021; He thought that point was important.
The real fact was, and he took it that the promoters of the Bill knew it pretty well, that there was practically no inquiry and no demand for so-called
pure beer. The Report of the Departmental Committee on Beer Materials contained the following;
"It may be pointed out that under the present law, if there was a large and genuine demand for all-malt beer, it would probably seldom be difficult for consumers to obtain it under guarantee."
Was it conceivable, if it was to the advantage of a brewer to advertise, and hold himself out as a producer of all-malt beer and nothing else, that he would not rush in and occupy the field, having before him such a large prospect of advantage and gain? That was worthy of consideration. It there was a real and growing demand on the part of the outside public for all-malt beer, why did not some brewer come into the market and fill up that demand at once The extraordinary departure which this Bill took, was that it did not matter whether they produced the required article or not, but they must own that they had used certain materials. The fact was that no analogy could be drawn between malt beer and half-malt beer, in the same way as between butter and margarine. Butter and margarine were two different products. Malt beer was admittedly the same product as half-malt beer, only they were made from different materials. When the same result might be reached by two different ways, and when they limited the choice of the producer to particular kinds of materials, he thought they were going a long way in the direction of legislation which interfered with the manufacturing habits and customs of the community, and in a direction which, to his mind, was both dangerous and unnecessary.
He had alluded to the pure beer cry. That cry had absolutely died out until it was revived by the lamentable occurrences which took place in Manchester and the North of England last year. He did not in the least minimise the seriousness or the gravity of that attack, hut he wanted to point out to the House in the first place, that the whole of that illness was traced to its source, namely, the sugar supplied by a particular firm. Dr. Buchanan in his report regarding the epidemic referred to the information obtained as to the use of brewing sugar in these words;
"This information, wherever obtained, was invariably to the effect that brewing sugar
had, at all events up to the end of November, been used at the brewery. In all but two eases the whole or part of the sugar used was said to have been obtained from Messrs. Bostock and Co. In two instances (the brewery in stone, and another brewery in Preston) it had been obtained from a sugar dealer who, I have been informed, was supplied by Messrs. Bostock and Co., as well as by other brewing sugar manufacturers."
If hon. Members wished to challenge that statement, they would have an opportunity of tracing the epidemic to another source. The epidemic had been traced to that particular source, and he went further and said that the liability of those who supplied that sulphuric acid in the first instance was undoubted, unquestioned, and unquestionable. There was no doubt in his mind but that in addition to a civil liability there was a liability to which the criminal law could be applied in respect of carelessness and want of due precautions on the part of those who supplied an article which they knew was going to be used in the manufacture of beer. There had been one or two prosecutions already in respect of that very beer, under the provisions of the Food and Drugs Act, 1875. The law as it stood at present was quite sufficient to deal with an occurrence of the lamentable character which had taken place in Manchester and its neighbourhood. It could be dealt with by means of a civil liability, or a criminal liability, or a prosecution under the Food and Drugs Act. There was another point;such a thing had never happened before. Although sugar had been in considerable use since 1878, and had been used more or less since 1847 in the manufacture of beer, during twenty-two years there had been no fatal result following its use. The result of the poisoning at Manchester was that a wave of analyses had swept over the whole country. The Local Government Board very properly sent out a circular, calling the attention of the county councils to their responsibilities under the Act. In his own county out of forty-four samples that were taken, forty-two were quite clear from arsenic, and the other two contained it in only an infinitesimal quantity. The London County Council had taken 168 samples and not a trace of arsenic had been found in any of them. The reports of analysts had on more than one occasion shown that
arsenical poisoning could exist in beer browed from malt and bops only, although the danger of contamination might be a very hunt one. A great authority bad said that if the materials were pure, the product would be pure;no matter what the materials might be.
There was only one other argument be should like to mention the argument that the consumer did not get what he asked for, and that he was entitled to get what be asked for. On that point, the Report of the Beer Materials Committee put the case of this Bill utterly and entirely out of court. The Report said;
"If the liquor produced from malt only were clearly distinguishable from, and definitely superior to, the liquor brewed with a moderate proportion of malt adjuncts, it would be with in the competence of Parliament, and might be in the public interest to assign separate distinctive names to these liquors. But, in our opinion, this is not at present the case."
What the customer asked for was beer, and he got beer. To sum up what he had said on these points, the hon. Member remarked that in the first instance the demand for legislation was founded upon a single instance, the Manchester scare, which was due to human fallibility and carelessness which no legislation could prevent, and for which the existing law was sufficient to provide a. remedy. Its object was to create an increased demand for British barley, and to raise its price. It was more than problematical whether the present Bill would have that effect. The effect would be absolutely nil, because no analyst could tell the ingredients used if the product was satisfactory. For these reasons he could only regard the measure as the outcome of that muddled benevolence which often attended the gathering together of a new Parliament. His interest as a. manufacturer was of the very smallest character, and its capital value was less than £;500, but his interest as a large and thankful consumer of beer was much greater, He asked that it should be a wholesome, sound, and good article, because he drank a good deal of it, and because he did not think the Bill would do anything to improve his drink he seconded the motion for its rejection.
MR. GEORGE WHITELEY (Yorkshire, W.R., Pudsey): I entirely asso-
ciate myself with the objection taken to this measure by the hon. and gallant Member, and I shall support him if he goes to a division, though I am afraid the arguments I shall endeavour to place before the House will hardly be arguments to which he will give agreement and assent. In the first instance, it seems to be almost sacrilege to break into what is in- has the appearance of a little rift or family jar in the ranks of our opponents. The two constituent factors of the Government party;landlords and brewers;are at issue on this point. In my humble judgment the Bill goes too far. I have read many Bills introduced into the House, but I do not think I have ever read one in which the phraseology and the terminology were so unfortunate as in this Bill. I believe the effect of that mistake will be that the trainers and promoters of the Bill will find in the division lobby that they have over-reached themselves, and that they have alienated a good deal of support which they would otherwise have enjoyed. The only justification for a measure of this character is the declaration that the law should be so altered as to make it certain that any purchaser desiring to buy what is called pure beer, or what I prefer to call malt and hops beer, should be able to do so without any chance of any other manufactured article being palmed off upon him. I believe that is a reasonable object. I believe the purchaser has the fullest right to be safeguarded, and if he wants malt and hops beer be should be able to buy it, even though a better beer were to be offered him than the one he desired to purchase. If the Bill had been so framed, and the character of this measure had been such as I have described, I myself would gladly have supported it. In other words, if instead of the words "malt beer" had been substituted the word "beer," and if the words "part-malt beer" bad been deleted and the word "ale" put in their place I should have voted for it, I hope my argument will not be taken as offensive by any hon. Member, but I venture to suggest that a great many of the arguments brought forward by supporters of this measure are in every respect undiluted humbug and nonsense.
Some of the hon. Members whose names are on the back of the Bill should imitate
the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Sleaford, and be a little more frank and candid and straightforward in avowing the object they have in view in the introduction of this measure. Nobody, whether in this House or elsewhere, is deceived. This measure is not introduced on behalf of the consumer or the purchaser. It is an agricultural and landlords' Bill in every respect. Does anybody imagine for one moment with regard to the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Sleaford that his bowels of compassion yearn for the unfortunate purchaser of beer, or that his withers are wrung on behalf of the man who wants pure malt beer and gets something with another compound in it? The frank letter which the right hon. Gentleman wrote some time ago would be quite sufficient to dissipate that idea. His object, as he informed the public, is to speed the plough, and this speeding of the plough is to take the form of an increased demand by legislation for English barley, and this Bill is nothing short of an attempt on the part of many Members to increase the value, price, and consumption of barley. The measure is hung upon this one slender fact, that a single firm, once in the lifetime of any hon. Member of this House, has produced glucose manufactured from sulphuric acid that was culpably or criminally defective;an incident that we may confidently predict will never occur again in our lifetime. Glucose and manufactured sugars are used not only in the manufacture of beer, but also very largely in the making of confectionery. Is the House going to enact that no child should buy anything but barley sugar?
My objection to the Bill is that it creates a standard. Even the wording and phraseology is puerile and juvenile in the extreme. It might be borrowed from the football field. "Malt beer" and "part-malt beer" suggest a "full back" and a "three-quarter back" arrangement. The Bill divides beer into two classes, and measures one by the other. It casts a reflection upon one kind of beer, and suggests that the particular quality of beer browed, from materials in the production of which hon. Members opposite have great interest has a purer character and is a more wholesome article
of drink and food than all the others put together. I was for some years connected with a brewery, and I can honestly say that I have never seen glucose or maize sugar or any other of these malt substitutes used in my life. But beer brewed from a certain admixture of sugar is a very much better liquor, more potable and palatable in every respect than one brewed from malt and hops alone. Even the arguments of the hon. Member who last addressed the House seem to me to prove that, because brewers are not altogether fools, if they found that there was a demand for malt liquor, and they were able to make a profit upon it, they would undoubtedly manufacture it. Pure beer under this Bill is nothing more nor less than poor beer. Take the beer consumed in the North of England. They drink pure beer there. It is what they describe as mild ale, and that cannot be satisfactorily manufactured without an admixture of sugar. You could not get the ordinary working man in the North of England to drink malt beer without this sugar; it would not be to his taste or palate. This Bill is so worded as to stimulate the consumption of one class of beer and to handicap another. This is, in a measure, protection. I venture to make the following propositions:;That all beers are brewed from sugar solutions; that those sugar solutions can be obtained either from the sugar of barley or malt, or from the starch of rice or maize in the ordinary process of fermentation; that rice and maize are equally as good articles of food as barley or malt (as hundreds of millions of our fellow-creatures exist upon rice, and we are all aware that the maize crop in America is perhaps the most valuable that America produces); that all beers are chemically pure whatever they may be produced from in these different classes; that they are equally good articles of food; and that, as has been argued already, it is absolutely impossible to tell by analysis what their composition is so long as they are chemically pure. To talk of beer that is brewed from the starch of rice or maize, as impure is an entire misuse of the word.
I was a member of the Committee that sat for several years to deal with the question of the adulteration of food products. We had before that Committee the chief Analyst of Somerset House, and he in-
formed us that there had been 17,604 analyses of beer during ten years, that 3,720 of those had been found to be adulterated, almost in every ease in public-houses, and that in every case the adulterant was either water or sugar or water and sugar mixed. He was asked this question;
"You did not find as a rule any other noxious compounds?"
His answer was;
"We did not find any noxious compounds in one of the samples."
That is to say, that for ten years the analyst of Somerset House had been dealing by analyses with beers, that between 17,000 and 18,000 samples had been examined, but not one single sample of beer had been found which could be described as adulterated by any noxious compound. That gentleman appeared before the Committee again two years later, when this evidence was given;
"Q. Is any analysis made of beer? A. Very frequently. Q. For what cause? A. We have not had, as I gave in my evidence before, any experience of any deleterious ingredients being found in beer for many years."
I think that dissipates the contention that beer is, or has ever been adulterated. In the Report of that Committee these words may be found;
"According to the Return afforded to the Local Government Board, excess of sulphur appears to be the only form in which beer is adulterated."
Therefore, I do not think that even the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Sleaford or the hon. Baronet the Member for Sudbury will endeavour to go beyond the chief authority upon this subject. Brewers say, and I think with some ground of justification, that as long as they produce an article that is chemically pure, that is wholesome as an article of food, they ought not to be tied down in any way as to what they produce.
I want to make a suggestion to the supporters of this Bill. We are living in days of statutory restrictions, statutory legislation, statutory parliaments, and other matters. For the first time we are asked to create a statutory liquor. I want the supporters of this new statutory liquor to endeavour to be original, to strain their powers of invention a little further in order to discover some descrip-
tion that may be applicable to this liquor alone. Words are coined for telegraphic purposes, often by a process of condensation, thus: "Grand Hotel" becomes "Granotel." In order to name this new statutory liquor, why not drop the "h" in malt and hops and call it "maltops"? Or why not immortalise the name of the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Sleaford or that of the hon. Baronet the Member for Sudbury by calling it either "Quilter" or "Chaplin"? We might then look forward to people calling across the counter for "a pint of Quilter drawn mild," or "a quart of Chaplin with a good head on it."
I believe that this Bill would have passed through the House with much less friction if hon. Members who had a hand in its drafting had been more careful in their phraseology, and had adopted words similar to "beer" and "ale." neither of which would cast any reflection upon the other. For myself, as I do not think it is a Bill conceived in the interests of the consumer and the purchaser, I shall vote against it.
*SIR CUTHBERT QUILTER (Suffolk, Sudbury): In rising to support this Bill I cannot forget the many occasions upon which the kindness and forbearance of the House have been extended to me during the last fourteen or fifteen years when this matter has been before us. I also desire on behalf of myself and other friends of pure beer, to thank the hon. Member for Peterborough for having afforded us this opportunity of a full and free discussion of our measure, and for the careful and interesting manner in which he introduced the Bill to the House. I naturally should have liked to reply to the two or three able speeches to which we have listened in opposition to the Bill, but I will only say that except on one or two minor points of detail the criticism seems to have been directed against some other Bill or a measure it was expected we should bring in, or that somebody was supposed to have brought in. The Bill before us, if it is carefully looked into, will be seen to aim at hardly any of the objects which have been imputed to it. It is a simple Bill; it is open, I believe, to the charge of being a mild Bill; but when you think of the magnitude of
the interests involved, and the responsibilities of the Government in regard to recent occurrences, I think it will be seen that this is a Bill brought forward in the interests of the consumer, and in furtherance of that policy of car-marking national articles of food which has already received the sanction of this House, and which, I believe, will this afternoon be further affirmed.
Although the Bill is not my Bill, I have been intimately associated with the hon. Member for Peterborough in its preparation, and it is one that I entirely support, for I believe it is calculated to go a very long way towards achieving the objects for which J and others have laboured for so many years. On previous occasions I have ventured to give reasons why some legislation of this kind was required, and I think I may claim, with all deference and modesty, that whilst every ground I have advanced in the past holds good to-day, the need of sonic additional protection to the consumer of beer has been emphasised in such a tragic manner as to place the necessity almost outside the limits of argument. But there is one statement with which I think I am hound to deal. It has been urged in the public press, as well as in this House, that the advocates of pure beer have sought to make capital out of this unfortunate epidemic. I contend that previous to the arsenic scare the claim for a statutory definition of beer had ample merits, but no one can contend that recent events have not afforded additional grounds for intervention.
Under other circumstances I should like to have referred to the ancient history of beer, but to-day I refrain from entering at length upon that interesting subject. I will merely go back to the time of the Egyptians, and mention that they brewed a beverage from barley, called zythus, which, according to Herodotus, was not much inferior to wine. I might also trace the history of ale and beer in our own country from the fifth century, when it is recorded that an Irish king was always to have a brave army and an inebriating ale-house, and that the Irish chief was always to have two casks in his house, one of ale and another of milk. I was going to refer to the state of the
West Indian planters, but that has been well dealt with by the proposer of the measure. I should, however, like to point out once more the extraordinary increase of the use of sugar in proportion to malt that has taken place since 1880. In 1870 the quantity of sugar used in brewing was 295,000 cwts.; in 1899 the quantity had increased to 2,943,752 cwts., or ten times the amount. To illustrate what the free mash tun has led to. I hold in my hand a Patent, No. 12241, which was taken out in 1899, for an improved process of converting wood, wood shavings, wood fibre and sawdust, as well as other materials, into glucose and alcohol. I think, Sir. you will agree with me that if we are to consume glucose at all we should certainly prefer it to be derived from some other source than sawdust. J am assured that this process has been employed in Germany for the past ten years;tor export only. I imagine. Whether the patent lights have been exercised in this country I am unable to say, hut, at any rate, I think it shows conclusively the necessity for enabling the public to obtain beer which they know has not been derived from any such source.
Referring to the legislation of 1880. I must confess that the more I study the circumstances connected with it the less I like it. It seems to me that the interests of the masses of our people;the beer drinkers;were sacrificed to the brewers and the revenue. The brewers were to he given perfect freedom and receive no "harsh treatment." The adulteration of the national beverage was alluded to as "an extension of the liberty of trade." the breaking of letters which ought never to have been imposed, 'the restraint on the revenue officials who had hitherto been the guardians of the health of the people was to be relaxed, and the free mash tun was to become, if the brewers chose to make it so, a "free poison tun." I need not go on with that, because we all know what it led to. It has been stated over and over again that the taxation to be levied upon the brewing interest would be met by a corresponding deterioration in the materials used in brewing, but who is responsible for the protection of the consumer? Private Members are not
responsible, I have every reason to believe that His Majesty's Government, when the present Commission have reported, will take such steps, as they are advised, for the protection of the health of the people, and for stimulating the activity of the Inland Revenue, which seems to have slumbered for so many years. But that is not our business, nor is it the object of this Bill. In December last the Secretary to the Treasury said that although the power to prevent the use of anything noxious or detrimental was conferred upon the Treasury, yet the duty of providing better securities for the wholesomeness of beer was placed by law on the local authorities, subject, if necessary, to the Local Government Board or the Board of Agriculture. Therefore, as I have before asked, where, between all these various authorities, does the responsibility really rest? Had this responsibility been more clearly defined I venture to say that the conclusion of the Minority Report of the Beer Materials Committee would not have been ignored as they were. In the course of that inquiry strong evidence was forthcoming as to the dangers which the present system involved.
The question of protection against fraud is a very important matter, and we have endeavoured to deal with it. The Bill now before the House does not even go so far as to prevent the use of anything except hop substitutes, although it will enable the purchaser to distinguish between the two classes of beer; that is, between that which contains substitutes for barley malt and that which does not. Apart from any considerations of public health, it seems to me that the Bill is only a logical sequence of all the recent legislation which has had for its object the protection of the public from what may be called "civil fraud." Barley malt is the essential characteristic of true beer, and in proportion as barley malt is displaced by inferior materials the purchaser is prejudiced. Surely when a man asks for beer he does not expect to receive a. beverage which may be composed partly of alcohol derived from sawdust and arsenical glucose. We are constantly told that in order to brew a beer to suit the public taste resort must be had to sugar and other substitutes.
We are prepared to let the public choose for themselves. The two classes of liquor which are defined in the Bill will stand on their own merits and fight their own battles for popular favour. We are told that people for the most part prefer beer made from chemicals, bright and sparkling. If that is so, they should welcome this Bill, because when they are thirsting for a glass of that chemical beer, which is so much the fashion, there will be no chance of their swallowing any of that thick heavy muddy stuff called "malt beer," which but for this Bill might be thrust upon them. De gustibus non est disputandum. But each person ought to be able to get what kind he likes, whether chemical or otherwise. I have found it very difficult to reconcile the zeal with which advocates of glucose and substitutes defend their concoctions as superior to old fashioned malt and hops with their anxiety to be allowed to trade under the title of a drink which they assert to be inferior. The principle of warranty is one which it is difficult to attack, and it is this principle which furnishes one of the grounds upon which I ask the House to pass the Bill. It is the principle which underlies all legislation with respect not only to the adulteration of food, but to trade marks, the hall marking of precious metals, and like public safeguards. It is a principle which is already applied by law to beer in the greatest beer-drinking country in the world, and in most other countries force of public opinion is such as to render the employment of substitutes practically non-existent. In America considerable agitation is proceeding upon the lines of the much-derided Pure Beer Bill. But then our American cousins do not know what is to their interest&#x0021; They are just the sort of people to take their cue from the poor down-trodden agriculturists in the east of England. They have found, as we have found, that there is in the drink of the people a possibility of ingredients from extraordinary sources, and with the proverbial promptitude and quickness of their race a Pure Beer Bill quite as drastic as anything I have ever had the honour of introducing to this House is to be brought forward during the present session, and will probably be passed into law. With regard to the feeling in this country on the question, I
may say that I myself have received 350 resolutions from boards of guardians, councils, and other bodies, unanimously urging me to persevere with this Bill. You cannot afford to ignore or despise those expressions of opinion.
MR. GEORGE WHITELEY: Have those resolutions been passed since this Bill was framed?
*SIR CUTHBERT QUILTER: No, not all; but a very large number have been received every day since the Bill was completed. They have been in support of the principle that I have always advocated, and which we have endeavoured to embody in this Bill.
SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT (Monmouthshire, W.): Were they for pure beer?
*SIR CUTHBERT QUILTER: Those that I have received were for my Bill; I suppose they have trusted me to introduce;
SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT: A Pure Beer Bill.
*SIR CUTHBERT QUILTER: As pure a beer Bill as possible. Besides those that I have received, I am aware that a great many other resolutions have been passed by public bodies of all kinds, amounting to between 450 and 500. It is, therefore, impossible for any agriculturist or town Member to say that he is not aware of the very strong feeling which exists in the constituencies on this subject. I have heard of instances in which the question has exercised an important influence on elections. One of the most remarkable cases is that of the hon. Member for Battersea. I can hardly imagine what the House would have been without the hon. Member for Battersea, but without him we should have had to be, but for the Pure Beer Bill. It so happened that the hon. Member was engaged in a very severe contest, his opponent being none other than one of the largest, if not the largest, manufacturer of brewing sugars in the country. But when our hon. friend was sore beset and feared defeat he raised the oriflamme of purity, and emerged the victor from the fight.
May I now deal very briefly with some of the provisions of the Bill? It will be noticed that it differs from the Bill of 1896, in that it does not appropriate the use of the word "beer" to beer made from malt and hops only, but we distinguish between beer so brewed and that in which substitutes are employed, by calling the one "malt beer" and the other "part-malt beer." The reason of that is obvious. I should have liked to retain the old title, but there is a great deal of force in the argument that if you say one thing is pure you thereby convey the imputation that others are impure. Hon. Members have tried to make out that we are making such an imputation in the words "part-malt beer." but I think that is an accusation which cannot be much relied upon. We have endeavoured to deal as gently as possible with the susceptibilities of the brewer, but it would have been very different if we had had the Pure Beer Bill. I understand one hon. Member to say-that he would much prefer to vote for the Pure Beer Bill. All I can say is that if we had known there would be sufficient support for the Pure Beer Bill I should naturally have preferred to ride the horse I have always ridden. We have been most anxious not to hurt the susceptibilities of the brewers, and, I think, we have pretty well succeeded, because the champions of the brewers here to-day have not really tackled the merits of this Bill. They have done their part very cleverly and nicely, but I think I recognise underlying their arguments some of the old friends. The old horses have been trotted out again about foreign barley, the interference with trade, and various other things. Whatever may be said about the names on the back of the Bill. I contend that the measure, as it is drawn, is a consumers' Bill, and I challenge anybody to say it is not to the benefit of the consumer.
Under Section 1, if a purchaser asks for malt beer he will know what he is getting. If he does not ask for malt beer he will know he is getting something else, which may or may not contain deleterious ingredients. We shall, no doubt, be told that malt beer cannot be regarded as free from, deleterious ingredients. A word ought to be said upon that, but I think I may leave
it to my right hon. friend. I have heard it remarked by a noble Lord at the head of a great brewing firm, that you would have to drink a thousand barrels of beer made from barley malt before you drank enough arsenic to do any harm. The arsenic is not in the malt but on it, and no doubt a process of screening will remove it. Section 2 I will leave to the able representatives of the hop interests to deal with. Sections 3 and 4 speak for themselves. Section 8 is designed to meet the case of a district in which the houses might be tied to a brewer who refused to supply malt beer. That such cases exist the right hon. Gentleman the Member for West Monmouth can testify, as in the recesses of the New Forest I have heard that such houses are to be found. There would be no hardship in requiring that malt, as well as part-malt beer should be kept, because there are 10,000 brewers in the country, of whom 5,000 brow all-malt beer, so that there would be no difficulty in the part-malt brewers obtaining a supply of all-malt beer for their tied houses. It has been said that this Bill was unfair to the English brewers as against the foreigner. That is not so at all. The Bill deals in a very fair manner with the question, and emphasises the fact that henceforth nothing is to prevent or affect the application to beer of the Food and Drugs Act, and that is really an important question. In connection with that legislation I should like to reiterate what I have before urged as to the necessity of appointing some Court of Reference composed of scientific and business men whose duty it would be to fix standards of purity for all articles of food and drink.
I will not refer to-day to Bavaria, or Austria, or Hungary, or Sweden, but there is one part of this kingdom which I am proud to say sets a bright example in respect of the purity of beer. Ireland sends us some of our greatest soldiers, our most eloquent orators, and it also sends us, with, I think, one exception, the products of all its breweries made entirely of barley malt and hops. We, the advocates of pure beer in this country, are grateful to them. I hope that we may look for their support to-day, and, I think I can promise them that if they are minded to take in hand that which may, perhaps, be called their national
drink, we shall fully sympathise with them, and lend them all the help in empower. Just a word about temperance I have expressed before, and I express again the opinion that this Bill, if passed, will be undoubtedly in the interests of true temperance. I believe that wiser counsels are prevailing in the councils of the leaders of the temperance party, and if that is so, they will have a great addition to their forces from all parties in this House. We shall have, I hope, plenty of criticism, but the brewers' interests evidently will be well looked after.
I want to say a word or two about the adequacy of analysis, which is the real difficulty to be met. I would ask the House to remember that our machinery will be adequate in ordinary cases, and that the analytical knowledge at present available is quite sufficient to supplement that machinery. If time had permitted I should like to have given a few words from the evidence of Mr. Clare Sewell Read, one of the most eminent authorities, but anyone can read that for themselves in the Beer Commission Report. The knowledge of our analysts by this arrangement will be largely extended Under this Bill as it is drawn analysis is only required for the purpose of comparative, examination, which is a very different thing from analysis for the purpose of ascertaining the precise ingredients employed. I believe only occasional analyses would be found necessary, and with the additional machinery provided by this Bill the old methods would be found quite adequate. I do not believe that the brewers will be likely to object to the provisions of the Bill, and I have the assurance of several brewers of good standing to this effect. I will not trouble the House with the reasons given against the Bill in the circular, which has been sent to Members of this House, and the only allusion I will make to that matter is that it is very remarkable that the Country Brewers Association, who are supposed to have issued that circular, on this occasion seem to have withdrawn a little from the front, and put their London confreres in the front of the battle. Can that be due to the fact that one of the consulting advisers of the Country Brewers Association was alsothescientific adviser to Messrs. Bostock
and Co.? That may be so or it may not, but Members of this House are quite capable of judging what their statements are worth. I must refer to the very large number of petitions in favour of this Bill. I am aware that the House does not attach much importance to petitions, because as a rule they are got up by wealthy and powerful organisations. But that is not so in the present case, for the feature of these petitions is that they have come almost entirely from the working classes, and among a bundle of them received this morning were petitions from nineteen counties, and intended to be handed to Lord Salisbury by a deputation. One was very interesting, because it came from a historic village in Oxfordshire. It came from Chalgrove, sacred to us all as being the place where that great Parliamentarian Hampden met his death. Every adult in that village signed the petition in favour of this Bill thus showing that the same independent spirit still lives in Oxfordshire. Two working men from the Stowmarket Division of my county have written to me to say that in a few days they had succeeded in getting the signatures of two or three thousand of their fellow workmen in favour of this Bill. I think that pretty clearly shows that whether the working classes in the towns or in the country are right or wrong, they are strongly in favour of some legislation of this kind, and it is not too much to hope that this House will listen to the prayers of these men. I ask the House to think of the health and strength of those men from whom our Army and Navy are recruited, and if they will adopt this measure they will strike another blow for what should be the inalienable right of Englishmen;namely, the right to be supplied with what they ask for, and that they may continue to have their national drink made as of yore, not from Spanish pyrites or German sawdust, but from the produce of their own country.
*COLONEL BROOKFIELD (Sussex, Rye): Before making any other observations, I should like to express my regret that my hon. friend the Member for the North-West Division of the county which I represent made a speech so extremely hostile to this Bill. I am much surprised
at one of the grounds upon which he did so, for he said that there was no demand for this measure. If that is the case 1 can only say that the habits and customs of the inhabitants of the northwestern part of Sussex compared with those in the east must be very different, and I venture to say that they must belong to a different order of intelligence also. My hon. friend has said that this is a new subject, but it is really a very old one. as all hon. Members who have been in the House as long as I have will be ready to confirm. This question has arisen quite spontaneously, and it came originally entirely from the general consumer, in whose interest the Bill is proposed. It would not be difficult to criticise the drafting of this Bill, but I would ask hon. Members to recollect that apparent inconsistencies and incongruities in a measure of this kind always represent some compromise, or attempt at compromise, with the various hostile interests. Personally I wish the Bill had been more uncompromising. My interest in the Bill is mainly confined to what the House, perhaps, regards as a side issue, but which is one of great importance to those I represent. Clause 2 provides "that it shall not be lawful to use in the brewing of beer for sale any article being a substitute for hops." The two questions which arise are whether substitutes of this kind are used and whether their use is injurious and ought to be prohibited. Perhaps I may remind hon. Members, if I am not detaining them with technical matter, what the function of the hop is. The hop as used by the general consumer is used as a bittering agent, and gives a peculiar aroma to the beer. It is also used to clarify, and it is important in connection with this question of substitutes to remember that a great use is made of the hop as a preservative, and it is as a preservative that it perhaps performs its most useful function. I will take the case of substitutes in a few words. I do not believe that they are used to any enormous extent. They are certainly not used by the most respectable firms of brewers.
The use of substitutes undoubtedly came in during what is known as the "hop famine" year, in 1882. when there was a great scarcity of legitimate
material. We have nothing but circumstantial evidence upon this point, but the figures are extremely significant, and I must ask the House to hear them. In the year 1882 certain compounds, or drugs, or chemicals went up enormously in price, and I think no candid man will deny the cause of it. Colombo root rose from 22s. to 95s.; chamomile, from 40s. to 120s.; quassia, from £;5 to £;40 a ton; and guinea grain, from 32s. to 60s. There was really no attempt made to explain this extraordinary rise in price in any other way than by the fact that hops had suddenly become very dear. There were many other evidences with which I could trouble the House of the existence of these substitutes, and in the inquiry before the Beer Materials Committee in 1897 a list of them, which originally appeared in the Mark Lane Express, was handed in in evidence, and will be found in the appendix of their proceedings. There is conclusive circumstantial evidence to be derived from the fact that advertisements for these compounds appeared in all the brewers' journals, and it is fair to assume that they were sold, and sold in order to be used. One hon. Member said there were only eight vendors of substitutes;I think he meant malt substitutes;but I hold in my hand, curiously enough, a list of eight vendors of hop substitutes. One firm especially advertises in the County Brewers' Gazette as follows;
"Don't use any other preservative. Kallissaline is, without doubt, the best preservative for stock and running ales."
Whatever "kallissaline" may be, it is certainly not hops. Another advertiser calls attention to a "Hop Supplement," and goes straight to the point by saying;
"The hop supplement (called 'H. S.'), to save one-third of the hops, and supplement the hops used, with valuable keeping properties," etc.
I do not think that it can really be contended that these substitutes do not exist; but, at the same time, I think it Is only the very low class brewer that uses them; and that in my opinion is all the more reason why the House should not hesitate for a moment to put a stop to their employment. I could give stronger reasons than those I have already adduced as to the evidence
of their actual use, and also the harm which they cause. Mr. Chapman is a great authority in the brewing world; he is an analytical chemist and expert, and he says this, to which I particularly call the attention of those who say that no substitutes are used:;
"The various sulphites and salicylic acid are alone used to any extent, and in far too many breweries these substances are regarded as regular brewing materials to be used on all occasions."
He also describes salicylic acid as the brewer's preservative par excellence. I am not a chemist myself, neither am I an expert in these matters, but I think most hon. Members of this House, and certainly the general consumer, would have a prejudice against the indiscriminate use of salicylic acid when they are drinking it in their refreshment in a liquid form. I have been unable to consult any more erudite authority than the Encyclopedia Britannica to see the effect of salicylic acid, and that authority says;
"The addition of salicylic acid to articles of food must be considered dangerous. When taken for some time it produces deafness, giddiness, and noises in the ears, lowering the temperature, reducing the pulse and rapidity of respiration, causing death by the paralysis of the respiratory organs."
We have seen these symptoms in the consumers of beer before now, though we may not have attributed them to salicylic acid. I say we ought to prohibit such dangerous materials entirely from being used as adjuncts to beer. Another compound used to a considerable extent is bisulphite of lime. This is prepared by burning sulphur or sulphur compounds, such as iron pyrites. Sulphurous acid is formed and this case is passed into water containing caustic lime, and the bisulphite results. It is probable, therefore, that some of the arsenic found in beer is due not only to the glucose, but to the use of bisulphite of lime in an impure state as an antiseptic. And upon this point I take as my authority Hooper's "Text Book on Brewing," which speaks of large doses of bisulphite being added in many cases, and mentions that it is often done so ignorantly that even the large quantities used fail to produce the desired effect. That is entirely from the brewer's point of view, but the con-
sumer has a still greater interest in not being made the subject of experiments of this kind. One more quotation on this subject of bisulphite of lime:;
"The strong point in favour of bisulphite of lime as a preservative is that when first added to beer its loosely combined sulphurous acid will exert a paralysing effect on the disease organisms present, and that after a time it will by oxidation become converted into innocuous sulphate of lime, and so will have no lasting influence on the flavour. In the majority of eases this is so, but unfortunately some bacteria have the power of producing the malodorous sulphuretted hydrogen from this compound, and the remedy then becomes almost worse than the disease."
It, in fact, becomes poisonous, and surely there can be no harm in promoting a Bill to prevent the use of poisonous materials. My hon. friend said, and I quite agree, that the Manchester epidemic has brought this matter within the sphere of practical politics. But year after year Bills have been brought in dealing with the same subject. I could never quite understand why the Food and Drugs Act could not have been made to comprehend the legislation we are now asking for. None of the hon. Members speaking for or against the measure have so far dealt with the subject from that standpoint, though I think it is a strong one, and in perfect harmony with public opinion. I sincerely hope that the Bill will be read a second time. Its main objects everyone, will agree, are reasonable, and ought to be supported by the House.
*MR. ARMINE WODE HOUSE (Essex. Saffron Walden) said that a good many of the speeches which had been delivered confused the issues upon which the Bill had been presented to the House. The simple position of the matter was that in 1896 the hon. Member for the Sudbury Division of Suffolk introduced a Bill upon the subject of pure beer, which was withdrawn upon an assurance being given by the Government that they would appoint a, Departmental Committee to inquire into the matter. That Departmental Committee had been described as one of the best which had ever been appointed, but that depended upon the way one looked at it. The Government liked a Committee whose inquiries resulted in a recommendation that nothing should be done, that there
was no danger, and that in this, the best of all worlds, everything was for the best. But there was one member of the Committee;Mr. Clare Sewell Bead;who proved himself to be a Balaam among the prophets. He dissented from the comfortable conclusions arrived at by the members of the Committee who signed the Majority Report, and his prophecies, spoken with the fearless perception of a seer, had turned out true. No one could deny that the sad story of loss of life in Lancashire had proved to the hilt that arsenic could appear in beer brewed from glucose. [An HON. MEMBER: And in beer brewed from malt.] He did not think that that had been conclusively proved, but there was no doubt that it had been found in beer brewed from glucose. That fact alone was sufficient reason for the Bill which was now before the House for Second Reading.
A great many arguments had been used in opposition to the Bill. There was the argument of Protection. He denied emphatically that there was anything in the Bill contrary to the strictest Free Trade principles. Then it was said it was in the interests of the barley growers. Was it for hon. Gentlemen on the Government side of the House, who specially desired to be considered the friends of the distressed agriculturist, to use that argument'? If this Bill was right in principle, and not contrary to the principles of Free Trade, and was only doing what had been done in the analogous case of butter and margarine, it was surely no reason for rejecting it because its effect might possibly benefit the farmer. Then it was said that the public liked light, bright beers, which could not be brewed from malt, but only from these chemical substitutes. He had lunched with two brewer friends a few days previously, and in regard to that argument, he was anxious to see what beer they preferred; and he noticed on that occasion they ordered "Bass." Messrs. Bass did not brew with substitutes, and his brewer friends showed on that occasion which beer they preferred to drink. Anybody who liked light, bright beer, would have a far better chance of seeing that they got it under this Bill,
and the brewers would have a greater demand for it. The object of the Bill was simply to enable the consumer to get the beer to drink which was brewed as he wished. Hon. Gentlemen knew perfectly well that under the present tied-house system the consumer had to take what was provided, especially in rural villages, and he especially commended the provision which gave power to licensing magistrates to insist upon malt beer being obtainable. This Bill could be no injury to the brewers, unless their desire was;and he did not for one moment say it was;to impose a particular class of beer upon their customers. The temperance party could not object to it. unless they desired;which he did not believe for a moment;that the fear of drinking arsenicated beer should deter the public from taking beer at all; and the Chancellor of the Exchequer could not object to it, because as he (Mr. Wodehouse) was informed, beer brewed of malt and hops had a higher gravity of alcohol, and was, therefore, better for revenue purposes. Legislation to define beer, to restore the liberty of the consumer to get the article he desired, was demanded by all sections of the community, and he earnestly hoped that the House would pass the Second Reading of the Bill, and that the Government would nerve themselves to the effort of giving it some support. If they did not, he could assure them they would bear of the subject again. The Bill could do no harm, and, as he maintained, must prove a valuable reform; and what was most important of all, it was urgently called for for the protection of the health of the people.
*SIR MICHAEL FOSTER (London University) said the main object of the Bill in the first place was to encourage the brewing of good sound beer, and in the second to assist the barley growers. He sympathised with the object which the promoters of the Bill had in view, yet, when he examined it in the cold light of reason, he could not but think that those who were pressing the Bill were going far to defeat their own object. As a moderate drinker of beer he was in favour of a good sound article, and, also, living among barley growers, he was
desirous of encouraging his friends and neighbours in the growth of that grain. Still, when he looked at the Bill from the technical, from the scientific point of view he could not support it. In the debate-on the Address one hon. Member asked for a definition of beer, but it was not given. What was beer? Beer was a fluid which, besides water, contained a certain quantity of alcohol and a small quantity also, not more than from 5 to 7 per cent., of a mixture of other substances, some of which were well known, some but little known, and some not known at all. It was these substances which he might speak of as "satellites" to the alcohol, which imparted to beer its distinctive characters. It was through those substances that beer was beer, and thus differed from any other alcoholic drink, such as whisky. The alcohol in whisky was the same as that in beer, and it was the character derived from those substances which was improved by the use of glucose or invert sugar; and, in the interest of scientific brewing, it was very undesirable to interfere with its use. The alcohol, from whatever substance it was derived, was still the same alcohol; it was the presence of these substances in their due proportion and in proper quantities which mainly determined the effect of the beer; whether, for instance, a man was wholly better for having drunk the beer, or whether, feeling better for a little while, he felt later on much worse. Certain of the above substances to which chemists gave long scientific names were, with the exception of one or two, created in the beer, came from malted barley, and could not be got from anything else. Barley was absolutely essential for making beer. Alcohol might be obtained from a variety of substances, and what was very curious was. that however formed it was the same alcohol as that formed from barley by brewing; and one effect of the introduction of glucose or invert sugar was to give an additional amount of alcohol to the beer. The complex changes which took place in brewing, and especially in the fermenting vat, were governed by the relation of the quantity of sugar to the quantity of other substances. A certain relation was necessary to bring about the desired result, namely, a certain
quantity of alcohol, accompanied by an adequate quantity and number of these satellites. The object of the scientific brewer;and he used the term in spite of the reference to "pseudo-science" by an hon. Member who had addressed the House;in adding sugar to the natural products of the malt was not simply to save so much of the starch of the barley, but because the barley alone contained an insufficient quantity of starch to bring about the desired changes.
He often had to travel by rail; and in order to increase his information he travelled, whenever possible, third class. He obtained in this way a great deal of knowledge which be should lose by travelling first-class. At the time of the arsenic-poisoning epidemic he remembered that his fellow-travellers were much agitated about "this 'ere glucose," which they thought was an altogether foreign thing, something altogether strange; and they were strongly impressed when they were told that it might be made from cotton waste. It was true that it might be so made; but. dirty as this substance might be at the beginning, it could be reduced to perfectly pure glucose absolutely identical with that produced by the vital activity of the barley and malt itself. It was simply adding a little more of what the barley produced itself, and the scientific brewer was using glucose simply because the barley alone was insufficient to produce the beer desired by the consumer. It was not merely substituting something for barley that was cheaper than barley. When the practice was introduced invert sugar was not cheaper than barley. The invert sugar was used simply by the brewer for the proper scientific carrying out of his operations. He appealed to the House to consider that if they prevented this scientific brewer, who had to deal with the common barley of England, from treating it in a scientific manner they would be hindering a development of the country. It was possible to get glucose absolutely free from impurity. That was one of the advantages of science. There were, no doubt, many disadvantages of science, but one of the advantages was that it enabled one to know when glucose was pure. The Manchester incident had no essential connection with the manu-
facture of beer; but it had distinct reference to the fact that our laws were not adequate to deal with the increasing dangers of modern civilisation. Every scientific advance brought with it evil as well as good. That had been the case ever since the Fall. Every scientific improvement brought with it a scientific danger. There was one danger attending the riding and driving of horses; there were other dangers of quite a different kind in meddling with electricity. All the world over chemical manufactures and substances were being thrown upon us; and our Food and Drugs Act needed to be amended to afford us the proper protection. This Manchester incident, which had been spoken of as an accident, ought to have been foreseen. If there had been an adequate watch kept over the materials which we took as food, it might have been foreseen that the consumption of sulphur in the South African War might lead the manufacturers of sulphuric acid to resort to pyrites. In that way the public should be protected, and not by a measure of this kind. Brewing had become a scientific occupation. Every year it was improving. Every year there was a tendency to produce for the consumer a better and more wholesome article at a lower price; and. as a scientific man, he desired to say that this measure was directly retrograde, was opposed to scientific methods, and would have an injurious effect upon scientific brewing.
*SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT: I congratulate the House upon a novel feature in its debates. We have had the advantage of obtaining information;as does not always happen;from the man who knows most about the subject of any one in the House. He has told us much that is interesting. He has given the House warning that it should not act without consideration in this matter. He has told us, what was not known before, that the Manchester arsenic epidemic was an indirect consequence of the South African War. All the sulphur of the world has been consumed there, and we have nothing more to hope for until there are further eruptions of Vesuvius. But there is another feature of the debate which I deplore. I have always looked
forward to this occasion;the discussion of a Pure Beer Bill;as to one of the most cheerful incidents of the Parliamentary session. The Bill used to he introduced by my hon. friend the Member for Sudbury with that genial joviality which adds ornament to his eloquence. But there was a tone of depression to-day about my hon. friend's speech. I observe that instead of the former independence of his attitude, indicated by his place below the gangway, he now speaks from above the gangway. He has changed places with the right hon. Member for Sleaford. But there is a still more fatal change than the change in the hon. Member for Sudbury, there is a remarkable change in the title of the Bill. It used to be a "Pure Beer Bill." But the adjective has disappeared. It is now only a "Beer Bill," and the purity has evaporated. There is no profession that this Bill is a Bill for securing what the community at large desires;the purity of its beer. The hon. Member and the distinguished scientist who has just addressed the House with so much authority and ability has studied the question in those great schools of beer in which we all graduated;I mean in the Universities, which may excel more or less in their classics and mathematics, but above all excel in the quality of their beer. I speak as a member of a college which prided itself, above all things, on its Audit Ale, whose consequences were most cheerful at the moment, though it sometimes happens that they were not quite so pleasant later on.
But I wish to call attention to the character and title of this Bill. A Pure Beer Bill;that is what the country has asked for; and that is what this Bill is not. It has no pretence to be a Pure Beer Bill. Any one hereafter may sell a beer that is not pure just as he did before, so long as he does not label it as "malt beer." As for my hon. friend the Member for Sudbury, I can no longer salute him as the true Simon Pure. He is an altered man. We were accustomed to a charming literary discourse upon the origin and history of beer, but in his depression to-day my hon. friend did not go further back than Egypt, and he quoted the opinion of Herodotus, whom I was surprised to hear him call the most truthful of historians. In that respect my hon
friend differed from the poet Juvenal, who described Herodotus as the most audacious of liars. But my hon. friend, appeals to us to day in a name which he knew would be venerated on this side of the House;the name of Hampden. But why did he not appeal in the name of Cromwell, who is supposed to have been connected with the brewing trade? I am inclined to think that it was principally on that account that his-monument was ever allowed to be erected even outside the Houses of Parliament. My hon. friend referred to the hon. Member for Battersea, and he said that he had won his battle upon a basis upon which we shall all rejoice;upon the basis of purity. He said that he had hoisted the oriflamme of purity. Yes, but what has become of the oriflamme of purity? The hon. Member for Sudbury no longer flies the oriflamme of purity; he is no longer a "pure beer" man; he is simply a "beer" man. What is it that has led to this unfortunate deterioration and degradation in the character of the hon. Member for Sudbury? It is that which happens very often to many men;he has got into bad company. He has gone into partnership with the right hon. Gentleman the Member for Sleaford. I can understand this coalition; it is like a famous coalition of old: but, if I may borrow an image from Mr. Pitt. I would say that I do know a just and lawful impediment, and before this ill-omened alliance is consummated, "In the name of pure beer I forbid the banns." No, Sir, I can well understand the basis of that alliance. My hon. friend is a simple-minded and innocent man. His purity was undoubted until he met the seducer, the Member for Sleaford. The Member for Sleaford came to him and, said, "Purity is all nonsense: what we want is higher-priced barley." So that the purity of the hon. Member for Sudbury unfortunately succumbs; he strikes "pure" out of the title of the Bill, and the purity of his style to-day is not what it was before. The object is accomplished, and we understand now, perfectly well, what this Bill is and what is the result of the coalition. We understand also the enthusiasm for this Bill, which has got rid of purity, in quarters where it was; not supported so eagerly before.
As to the first feature of the Bill. The question is, assuming that the object is to promote the consumption of malt and so to advance the price of barley, whether, when we are going to commit a crime, it is not worth considering whether it will be profitable. When I studied this question on a former occasion I confess I doubted whether the landed interest are going to get as much out of this Bill as they expect. What they expect, of course, is to have an increased consumption of barley. I dare say there will be an increased consumption of barley, but it is not so certain that it will be an increased consumption of their own barley. That is a different question. I am sorry to say, with great respect for the agricultural interest, that they have weaknesses which have existed ever since the time of Virgil, who said, "How happy are the landed interest if they only knew their own advantages"; but in that respect they have always been somewhat defective. At the time when I entered Parliament I remember that the one thing they desired was to do away with the malt tax. They succeeded. Now the greatest mischief that ever happened, according to them, was the repeal of the malt tax. I am afraid there may possibly happen to them, with reference to this attempt to increase the price of barley, what happened in the case of the malt tax. No doubt there is a portion of this kingdom, which I regard with special interest and affection, because it is the most Liberal county of England, which will derive benefit;I mean the county of Norfolk, and I am sure that the House will have heard with great pleasure and satisfaction the speech of my hon. friend the Member for Saffron Walden, who represents a great Norfolk family. They represent the class of high-priced barley; but the majority of barley interests in this country are second and third class barleys, and the question is when this Bill is passed what will be the price of these barleys, and how far it will affect those barleys above 30s. and the lower class of barleys above '20s. [Cries of "26s."] I am speaking of inferior barleys which are used in brewing, but these are matters upon which I do not profess to descend into particulars. But I recommend to their consideration what you have been told by persons who are well acquainted
with the question, that if the brewer is to be contined to barley alone he may take foreign barley rather than second-rate English barley. The Bill will not accomplish what they desire.
It is said that this Bill is going to give to every man the opportunity of having the beer he wishes. That is one argument held forth in favour of this Bill. That is a very good thing if it accomplishes the aim, but it does not accomplish it at all. What prevents people from getting the beer they choose, to ask for is a totally different thing. It is the tied-house system. A whole district is engrossed by one brewer. He gives any sum of money to get hold of these public-houses, and having got hold. of them he does not serve the public with the beer they ask for or wish for, but the beer which it suits him to brew. He insists not only upon giving them the beer he chooses, but he insists on the publican in many cases taking other materials;tea, coffee, mineral waters, tobacco, and spirits from him, and at much higher prices than they are served, to any one else. The tied public-house is served at a much higher price with the beer than is charged to a free house in the neighbourhood. I have seen it stated, that the difference in the charge for beet to the tied public-house is 16 or 20 per cent. That is a thing which the hon. Member for Sudbury was good enough to say in the eighth clause he had taken into special consideration for my particular behoof, but I find, that I cannot insist upon having any beer I like under this clause. I can only insist on having malt beer, though it may be that I desire some other kind of beer. My experience is that these strong malt beers are not the most popular form of beer to-day. The old strong malt beer which in our youth we were so proud to drink disappears in more advanced years in favour of lighter beer. In my own household I do not drink; beer myself, but I find that the beer I which all my friends desire to drink is the beer called Pilsener, and I am told that there is a great consumption of it in this House. This led me to inquire what Pilsener was, and going to the fountain head of knowledge in the person of my hon. friend the Member for Sudbury I asked whether beer drinkers
Blight be able to order Pilsener at any I public-house. He said, "No, Pilsener is brewed from rice." But if the public is going to drink beer brewed from rice what is the value of Clause 8?
*SIR CUTHBERT QUILTER: I want the right hon. Gentleman to consult the evidence of Mr.;[Cries of "Order."]
*SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT: Oh, no; I want him to consult the Sleaford interest. If it will only allow you to order malt beer, and if people want beer brewed from rice, I should like to know whether his partner, the Member for Sleaford, will agree in Clause 8 that the word "malt" shall be added to the word "rice." That would be a test as to whether the object of this Bill is to let everyone have what they want, or whether it is only to force upon them a beer made of a particular commodity which answers the purpose of the Member for Sleaford. I am afraid that in many Bills in this House there is a great deal of;what shall I say, glucose?;but of hypocrisy in this Bill being called a Bill for improving the quality of beer, while as a Bill for allowing people to have any beer they like there is no attempt at anything of the kind. Really, what is this Bill going to do? Supposing the brewer wants to supply to his customer the old beer to which he has been accustomed. He will brew it, I suppose, all the same. Under the Bill you make no restrictions as to whether he is to use glucose or sugar, or anything else. He is to do that as before; but you say, under Clause 8, that he must also offer a thing which is labelled as malt beer, and he will have it, I suppose, upon sale, but he will have it on sale on whatever terms he likes. He may say to his customer: "Oh, here is malt beer. That is 4d. a quart. But here is the old beer you are used to. and which you like. You can have that at 3d."What comes, then, of the operation of this Bill It is just like in a public-house, calling for an ordinary glass of brandy, and compelling a man to drink liqueur brandy. I am told that beers which are brewed with sugar are brighter beers than beers brewed exclusively from malt, and they suit the public taste. If (these things are true, then the operation of this Bill will come to little or nothing
at all. If that be so, then the worst or the best of this Bill is that it will have no effect at all. If this were a Bill for effecting in a useful and practical manner the purity of the beer my hon. friend the Member for Sudbury knows well, I would embrace him and the Bill at once. I said to him, "You may rely upon my support for a Bill for pure beer." To my disappointment, he comes and presents a Bill which is not a Bill for pure beer at all, but leaves out the only quality I particularly care about. I cannot see that this Bill will be of any particular value, and it is a great disappointment to me that my hon. friend the Member for Sudbury should have abandoned the character he so much adorned, and should have struck that flag under which for so many years he "braved the battle and the breeze."
MR. CHAPLIN (Lincolnshire, Sleaford): After the speech of the hon. Member for London University and the highly amusing speech of the right hon. Gentleman the Member for West Monmouthshire, I must say I feel some little trepidation in addressing the House. The right hon. Gentleman said that my hon. friend the Member for Sudbury had been seduced into bad company by the Member for Sleaford for some dark design which had not been made clear. The right hon. Gentleman, doubtless, would be very glad indeed if he could "seduce" my hon. friend back again to his own side of the House. It will be a long time, however, before he can induce my hon. friend to take any course of that kind.
*SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT: Vice is stronger than virtue.
MR. CHAPLIN: That can hardly be the case when the right hon. Gentleman is concerned. I. acknowledge that the speech of the right hon. Gentleman was the most excellent piece of fooling which we have heard for some time. The right hon. Gentleman was in his very best vein, and in that character he was the more grateful to me, because it showed that the right hon. Gentleman had nothing in earnest to say against the Bill. The right hon. Gentleman, as I understand, took some exception
to Clause 8 of the Bill as being part of the nefarious scheme of the Member for Sleaford. As a matter of fact, I had no more to do with Clause 8 than the right hon. Gentleman himself. Then he gave us some information with regard to Pilsener beer, which he said was brewed from rice.
*SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT: As I was informed by the Member for Sudbury.
MR. CHAPLIN: So far from Pilsener being made of rice, I am informed that exactly the opposite is the case. It came originally from Germany and Austria, more particularly, where they are forbidden to use substitutes for malt on all occasions. ["No."] The beer is as pure as could be desired, and that is the reason why Pilsener beer has become so popular. It is not true that my motive in supporting this Bill is to increase the price of barley in this country; but, still, as an incident arising from the endeavour to prevent this, one hon. Member criticised the phraseology of the Bill. I am not concerned with the phraseology of the Bill, but it is certainly new to me in this House to hear an hon. Gentleman say he would not vote for a principle in which he believed. It has been said that this is nothing but a landlords' Bill, the motive of which is simply to artificially raise the price of English barley. I do not know whether it is a landlords' Bill or not, but I do know that I have received information that some forty or fifty of the largest trade unions of this country have passed resolutions warmly supporting it. It has been stated that my first object in taking up this question has been to increase the price of barley. That is not true. My first object was to prevent a recurrence of the poisoning of hundreds and thousands of people in all parts of the country. At the same time I have always hoped and believed, and I believe still, that, as an incident arising out of the proposals to try and prevent this poisoning in the future, it is possible that we shall be able to do something to keep the plough going in many parts of the country, and thereby to arrest the rural depression which
I every one laments, and which no one professes to lament more than the hon. Member for Stockport; and to provide more employment and better wages for a large part of the agricultural population, and so induce them to remain in the countryside. I am not ashamed of those views. I have voiced them before, and shall do so again without asking the consent of those who differ from me and who take a different view as to agricultural labouring classes of the country.
But to go back to the Bill and some of its critics. The right hon. Gentleman says that the best of this Bill is that it will come to nothing. Let us see. I do not think it will be much trouble to study the Bill, and I think, in spite of all that has been said, it does give and will give to the whole of the country actual pure beer, such as has always been advocated by my hon. friend the Member for Sudbury whenever it is wanted. The object of the Bill is perfectly simple; it draws a distinction between beer brewed from malt on the one hand, and beer brewed from malt substitutes on the other, and it provides that whenever beer of either description is sold, the bottle or vessel containing it, or where it is on draught, the engine or tap from which it is drawn, is to be labelled or marked so as to show to the person asking for it what kind of beer he is going to get, the object being to enable the customer to know what kind of beer it is, and in this way to give him an opportunity to protect himself and to prevent the possibility of his being poisoned in the future by beer like that supplied in Manchester, which we know was brewed from substitutes for malt in which the poison which has done so much harm was contained. And when contending that this Bill is insufficient for the purpose, and does nothing to prevent brewers using malt substitutes which may contain poison, hon. Members ought to remember that it was never professed that this was intended to be a complete measure. On the contrary, it was stated quite openly during the debate on the Address that although there were a great variety of ways in which this question could be effectively dealt
with once and for all, that was a subject for legislation by the Government rather than by private Members, but that if the Government were unwilling to act pending the Report of the Royal Commission which they appointed, the least that ought to be done pending that Report was to give the people an opportunity of protecting themselves by a small measure requiring a declaration as to the materials of which the beer was composed. That is what is practically done by the Bill before the House, and is a complete fulfilment of our statements on the occasion of the debate on the Address; and for the purpose of giving effect to this Bill, machinery for detecting or tracing any false declaration has been provided until such time, and I hope that time will not be long postponed, when science will come to our aid and do what it is not at present able to do, to detect any false declaration and prevent such mischief as arose a short time ago at Manchester and elsewhere. It seems to me therefore that this Bill in that regard is a reasonable proposal.
Now I come to some other objections that have arisen. It has been stated that it would cast a slur upon the other kind of beer that was sold;that is the first charge that is brought against it. But how does it cast a slur? Both kinds of beer are treated in the same way, both have to make the required declaration, and if it be true, as alleged, that the beer manufactured from malt substitutes is so much better than the old-fashioned malt beer, the brewers of these beers ought to feel greatly obliged to us for giving them such a great advertisement, and enabling them to publish to all the world the fact that their beer is not brewed from malt alone.
The next charge is that there really was no reason for introducing this Bill, that the Manchester epidemic was an accident due to beer browed from one form of substitute alone. To that I take exception, and I quote the evidence given by the county analyst of the county of Lancashire. He says that besides the firm of manufacturers in question, sugar from two other firms had been found to contain arsenic. The hon. Member with whose temperate speech this debate began told us that there were
eight manufacturers of substitutes altogether. Well, three out of eight is a very dangerous percentage, and that makes the passing of this Bill all the more necessary.
Then it is said that if the Bill were passed it could not be administered. Why not? This Bill confers on the local authorities all the powers at present possessed by the officers of the Inland Revenue;enormously wide powers, under which they could do almost anything;and if this Bill is not administered properly it will be the fault of the local authorities, and not for the want of powers placed in their hands under the Bill. The only difference is this, that where these powers are used, and used with perfect success, in the interest of the revenue, we think it is not unreasonable to say that they should be used with equal success in the interests of public health. It has been said that all this Bill will do will be to harass the brewers and the publicans. No power is given to harass anybody, but if it is permissible-to harass people for the purpose of revenue, surely it is just and permissible to harass them in the interests of public health.
My hon. friend said that arsenical poisoning might result from beer brewed: from malt. I know that argument perfectly well, and a very ingenious red-herring it is to draw across the path, but where is the proof of it? I ask the hon. Gentleman now to give us a proof;to tell us the proportions in which arsenic has been found in beer brewed from malt. Nobody has been able to show that there is more than a mere trace of anything in beer brewed from malt alone that is prejudicial to health. We take our stand on the experience of hundreds of years, we say that malt is the same now as it was generations ago, and it is absolutely ridiculous to pretend that any danger can arise from beer containing only one 250th part of a grain of arsenic. It does not become dangerous until you have one sixteenth of a grain at least. If hon. Members refer to The Times of yesterday they will find in the report of the proceedings of the Royal Commission on Arsenic Poisoning that an eminent witness, a consulting chemist, said that beer made from malt was "absolutely safe," thus repeating the statement that
was made this afternoon by my hon. friend below me.
Another charge that is made against the Bill is that it gives a preference to foreign beer over English beer. Now, I have always pointed out with regard to foreign beer that foreign beer is made under laws and conditions which prevent the use of malt or other substitutes altogether. I do not know if any foreign brewer has taken to using substitutes, but if any one of these brewers was found to be doing so, in the countries to which I have referred, in all human probability he would be lynched.
Then comes the objection raised by the right hon. Gentleman, and supported by the opponents of the Bill, that it will be injurious to the growers of inferior English barley, and I thought at first that possibly there might be something in that objection: but, so far as I am concerned. I am perfectly easy upon that point. If, as they say, these light, bright, sparkling beers which the public like cannot be made without the use of sugar, how is it that according to the Inland Revenue Returns more than half the brewersin this country brew their beer without sugar, from malt alone, and produce the same class of beer?
SIR WILLIAM HARCOURT: That as brewed from the highest price barley.
MR. CHAPLIN: So arc all good beers. The right hon. Member does not suppose, surely, that a brewer who brews with barley malt successfully is going out of his way to buy bad barley. The right hon. Gentleman says it will tend to the use of foreign barley, and then he twits us with the mistake we made with regard to the malt tax, but it was not the repeal of the malt tax, but the introduction of the free mash tun which did the harm, which was forced upon us, thanks to Mr. Gladstone. It will perhaps induce a great increase in the use of foreign barley, but it will leave in its place the sugar which is now being used. Properly treated, I am prepared to say that the barleys of England can hold their own with all the barley in the world, and if all that is said as to the use of foreign barley is true it must tend to raise the price of foreign barley, and as a conse-
quence the value of the barley of this country, although that is not the chief object as I have said before in this Bill. The hon. Gentleman the Member for London University told us in the peroration of his speech that this was a retrograde measure, and he explained to us how it was that the brewer would have to use foreign barley, and he said it was because he required more sugar than English barley produces. That may be so, and it may be the origin of sugar being used, but that is not the reason why 50 per cent., and sometimes 75 per cent, of sugar is used for this purpose;30,40,50, 60 and 70 per cent, is customarily used. It is used in these enormous quantities because it is infinitely more profitable. Then I am told that the Manchester epidemic was an accident which will never occur again, that the greatest precautions are being taken to prevent it, and that we maybe perfectly safe in the future. Unfortunately I have heard things like that very often. That was very much what the previous Committee reported, and it is probably owing to that Report that sufficient care was not taken, which, if it had been taken might have prevented the loss of so many hundreds of lives, and prevented the grave and serious illnesses of which people are actually dying at the present time. I had one instance sent up to me two days ago. In a matter so serious to the public health we have no right to trust to the chapter of accidents. I frankly acknowledge that this Bill may not be all that is desired by some of the most ardent supporters of the movement, but at least it will give to the public the opportunity of protecting themselves by requiring a declaration to be made as to the materials of which beer is composed. This is no new principle in our legislation, it is done for other things for a less reason;namely, to prevent fraud. In my humble judgment, protection to life and health is even more important than protection from fraud, I can conceive of absolutely no objection to the Bill unless it be that it will enable a certain section of the brewing interest in this country to make even larger profits than they are making at present. But it does seem to me that the profits to be made in any industry are not to be weighed in the balance for a moment against the health and lives of the people, and I earnestly
call on the House to vote for the Second Reading.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT (Warwickshire, Rugby): I will not detain the House for more than a few minutes while I explain the reasons why I mean to vote for the Second Reading of this Bill. It seems to me that the principle, machinery, and clauses of the Bill are three separate matters. There is a great deal to be said in criticism of the machinery, and I doubt very much whether the supporters of the Bill will ever be able to bring into practical use their phrases "malt beer" and "part-malt beer." Can anyone imagine an ordinary working man going into a public-house for what is now known as a pot of half-and half, and saying, in the phraseology of the Bill, "If you please, I want a quart of malt beer and part-malt beer, and a dash of part-malt porter and a dash of part-malt stout." By the time he got through that sentence the barman would, no doubt, be dissolved in laughter, and the poor man would never be served. Clause 8, dealing with the power of licensing justices to require malt beer to be sold, is a very dangerous principle to establish in connection with our licensing system. Whereas hitherto the province of the justices has been clearly defined, you propose by Clause 8 to allow them to impose other conditions on holders of licences which were never thought of before.
But the main question for the purposes of to-day's discussion is as to whether the principle of the Bill is to be supported or not. There is a great difference of opinion on both sides of the House as to what the principle is, but I venture to submit that the principle is that a man shall get what he wants. It is not the brewing of English barley as against foreign barley, not the prevention of arsenical poisoning, but that if a man wants to buy beer made of malt and hops, he should be able to buy it. I quite agree that the agitation in favour of pure beer has not "caught on" with the public, and that the agitation created by the arsenical poisoning has brought the attention of the public at large to the fact that all beer is not brewed from malt and hops, as they supposed. As a conse-
quence there has grown up an agitation, which has undoubtedly considerable strength in the country, for a Bill to enable a consumer who wants a malt and hops beer to get a malt and hops beer. What are the arguments against the principle of the Bill '? The hon. Member who moved its rejection dealt with it under four divisions. First of all he said-it would not prevent arsenical poisoning. I do not think that anybody expects that it will. What it will do is that it will enable any man to avoid buying beer which contains arsenic. Then the hon. Member said that it would not conduce to the benefit of agriculture. That, I venture to say, is not an argument for or against the Bill. It may benefit agriculture. That opinion is held by many hon. Members of this House. I doubt it myself very much, for it seems to have been admitted by experts that if there is to be a benefit to anybody at all, it will benefit the people who grow the best kinds of barley; but these already find a ready market and fetch a high price, and the second classes of barley would not be helped at all;at least, I doubt whether they would. The third argument was that the Bill could not be administered. That was one of the strongest arguments against the Bill, and would be destructive to it if it could be proved. But the hon. Member's position is this. He says it cannot be proved by chemical analysis whether the beer is made from malt and hops only, or from substitutes. But the methods adopted by the Excise at the present time would afford a very large protection, and would enable a man to get what he wants. Again, the hon. Member says that you cannot exactly define beer, and that you cannot by chemical analysis distinguish beer made from malt and hops and beer made from substitutes. There is another very common case;you cannot define milk; but there is, I believe, a standard which is adopted by Somerset House as to what is milk; although it is not a standard which is considered complete or satisfactory, yet you can very often get something which is called milk in practice, but which does not satisfy all the requirements of Somerset House. The last argument is that the Bill would help foreign barley against English barley. Again, that may be the case.
COLONEL MILWARD: The foreign brewers.
*MR. CORRIE GRANT: I beg the hon. Member's pardon for my mistake. It is said that the Bill will keep foreign brewers. But, from the point of view of the consumer, I submit that that is not a reason for rejecting the Bill. The point of view of the consumer is that if he wants to drink Pilsener beer, or Bavarian beer, or the heavy Munich beer he knows what he is getting, and what he is paying for; but if he wants to drink English beer made from barley, hops, yeast, and water, let him have the opportunity of getting it. The strongest argument in favour of the Bill was actually used by the hon. Member who seconded its rejection. He mentioned the case of margarine and butter. I do not know whether the hon. Member has referred to former debates in the House on the question of making and selling margarine and butter. One of the strongest arguments used against the Margarine Act was that it would have the effect of depriving the poor consumer of the opportunity of getting what he was willing to pay for as butter, but not as margarine. The Bill passed, but the consumption of margarine has not ceased; in fact, the price of the best margarine is higher than that of the worst butter. Under that Act the trader has to disclose to the consumer what he is buying, but that has not injured the trade in margarine. And the same will happen with beer. A man who can sell beer brewed from substitutes for malt and hops will continue to brew it, and the consumer will be able to obtain what he wants. On these grounds I support the Second Reading of the Bill.
*THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER (Sir MICHAEL HICKS BEACH, Bristol, W.): It will not be necessary for me to detain the House at any length so near the close of the sitting, but I feel it is necessary to make a few observations in regard to this Bill. I admit that from the point of view of the Chancellor of the Exchequer this Bill is a distinct improvement upon other Bills which have preceded it from the hon. Member for Sudbury. There is no attempt in this Bill to confine the word
beer to the liquid brewed wholly from malt and hops under penalty, and there is no attempt to describe beer brewed from other materials as adulterated. Therefore there is nothing to interfere directly or indirectly with the revenue or with the freedom of the mash tun, which some regard as such a prized privilege in the brewing of beer. But. in spite of that, there are difficulties in the Bill, which, holding the office I do, I feel it is my duty to put before the attention of the House of Commons. Nobody has suggested that this Bill will, in itself, put an end to the possibility of unwholesome and even of poisonous materials being used in the manufacture of beer, and it is perfectly obvious that if that can be done it must be attempted in a very different way. That being so. I do not think it is quite fair on the part of hon. Members who have supported this Bill to refer, as some of them have done, to the recent epidemic in Manchester and the neighbourhood and the danger that might arise from a recurrence of such epidemics, as reasons in support of the Bill. There was, no doubt, a very strong and very proper feeling throughout the country at the time of the occurrence of that epidemic that sufficient care had not been exercised in the choice of materials for brewing, and that in some way or other, through the Government or through the local authorities, there should be more stringent regulations made and enforced to secure the purity of materials used by brewers. With that object my right hon. friend the President of the Local Government Board recommended the appointment of a Commission to inquire into the actual facts of the Manchester epidemic, and to report what steps might be taken for the purpose to which I have referred. When that Report is received it will, no doubt, as my right hon. friend the Member for Sleaford has said, be the duty of the Government to deal with it and to make such proposals to Parliament as may be deemed necessary. This Bill does not touch that matter at all. Yet we are asked to support it on the ground of meetings held and of petitions presented to this House based upon the dangers of a recurrence of the epidemic, though those petitions were not presented with any reference to the Bill
before us. The. argument is now suggested to us by the hon. Member who has just sat down, and by the hon. Member for Peterborough, that though the Bill does not do anything directly to secure the wholesomeness of beer, yet it will have this effect;it will enable the consumer to ask for malt beer or partly malt beer, and that the consumer who desires to be safeguarded against poisonous ingredients will always ask for malt beer. Well, in the first place, it has been shown that there is a possibility of the presence of arsenic in malt itself.
ME. CHAPLIN: Not in the beer.
*SIR M. HICKS BEACH: In some instances, I believe, such a possibility has been shown, but at any rate I will consider that matter as sub judice. But beyond that, this Bill does nothing whatever to secure that the consumer who asks for part-malt beer shall have a wholesome liquor. That may be brewed from any materials whatever, even poisonous materials, and therefore, unless he asks for malt beer be is not safeguarded at all. If he does ask for malt beer is he quite sure of getting it? Is it possible under the provisions laid down by this Bill that he can have that security? I have gone carefully with the Inland Revenue authorities into the proposals in the Bill for carrying out the object, and I am bound to state to the House that, so far as I. can judge, these securities are absolutely illusory. In the first place, the brewer has to ticket all the casks or other vessels in which he sends out beer as malt beer or partly malt beer. Well, if there was continuous supervision of the stock account of the brewer and of every delivery from his brewery, I suppose it might be possible, having regard to the comparatively small number of breweries in the United Kingdom, to secure that the contents are according to ticket. But the casks or bottles go to agents, go to bottlers, and thence are distributed over all the public-houses in the kingdom; and it would be absolutely impossible for the Excise authorities to follow the beer throughout the process, and it would be equally impossible for the officers of a local authority on whom the right hon. Gentleman desires
to impose this duty to do so. Therefore by the time the beer reaches the consumer in the retail public-house, which is the time when you want to secure the guarantee that the beer is part malt or wholly malt, there can be no security that the label over the beer-engine, the bottle, or the cask actually represents the character of the beer inside.
Now, it has been said, with great reason, that the principle that a person who asks for a certain defined article should be entitled to the protection of the law from fraud has been accepted by Parliament. But I do not know that this principle has ever been accepted except in regard to articles which it would be possible to analyse to ascertain whether the article is what it is represented to be. This by common admission you cannot do. Throughout this debate it has been agreed that as between the beer brewed from malt and partly from malt analysis cannot determine the difference. Therefore we are utterly deprived of the ordinary safeguard that a purchaser has, if he chooses to take the trouble, to secure the article he requires. Under these circumstances, I confess that although I entirely accept the principle, to which the hon. Member who has just sat down attaches great importance, that there should be a safeguard to the purchaser, yet I cannot myself see how it is possible to apply the principle to this particular article of beer. It is my business to look at the matter from a practical point of view, for, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, I am responsible for the Inland Revenue, and cannot be guided by sentiment, which has prevailed a good deal on this question. I cannot, as I have said, see how it will be possible to enforce the provisions of the Bill, and therefore, though it is right to say I speak for myself rather than on behalf of the Government, I cannot give my vote in favour of the Bill.
Mr. CHAPLIN rose in his place, and claimed to move, "That the Question be now put"; but Mr. Speaker withheld his assent, and declined then to put that Question.
COLONEL WALKER (Widnes) said it had been alleged by the right hon. Mem
ber for Sleaford that certain firms did not use any sugar at all, and that Clause 9 was a protection for those firms. He did not know whether that was the case or not, but he would like to inform the House what that meant. It meant that those brewers used now three-fourths foreign barley and only one-fourth English barley, and in addition to that, in virtue of Clause 9, they could use "priming" which amounted to1&#x00BD; per cent, of un-fermented sugar;1&#x00BD; per cent, unfermented sugar was equal to three times that quantity of fermented sugar, which meant that the proportion of sugar used by these firms was no less than 4&#x00BD; per cent; and the proportion of sugar used by the brewers who used three-fourths English barley and one-fourth sugar was only 8 per cent. That was a point which ought to be considered by the House.
*MR. GROVES (Salford, S.) said that as one who had had experience of the trade for thirty years he should have a word or two to say on the subject. The moderate use of sugar had nothing in the world to do with the profits of the brewer. When the public demanded an article that could be produced by the addition of a small percentage of sugar rather than by malt alone, they must have it. In his own brewery he used an average of about 90 per cent, of English malt and 10 per cent, of sugar. Attention had been called to the recent deplorable epidemic and the arsenical contaminat on of one brand of brewing sugar, but he would like to emphasise the fact that the public analyst of Manchester had also found arsenic in malt. He had no particular objection to Clause 2. because the substitutes to which it referred were, he believed, entirely confined to the production of teetotal beverages. He knew hundreds of brewers, but he knew no single brewer who used these substitutes for hops in brewing beer. As to Clause 9, dealing with malt beer, he had the best reason for thinking that it had been deliberately put into the Bill for the purpose of arranging a compromise with certain large brewing firms. Under the operation of that clause they would be entitled to label beer as "malt" beer which was no more "all-malt" beer than that which was labeled "part-
malt beer. The Bill was too ridiculous for consideration. The brewers had no objection whatever to a measure of this kind drawn on reasonable and common-sense lines, and which would really provide for the purity of beer, but the present measure was so absurdly drawn that the clauses would be inoperative. He maintained that those concerned mostly in the purity of beer were those who manufactured it. He asked the House by rejecting this measure to say that it was an immature Bill, and required further consideration. Let the Bill be sent to the limbo of all ill-considered measures. The framers of the Bill, if it were repeated, would then have opportunities of amending it. As he had said, the brewers did not object to any of the principles of the Bill, but its clauses were so tied round with red tape, and ridiculous anomalies that he had no hesitation;and he hoped the House would have none;in voting against it.
COLONEL KENYON-SLANEY (Shropshire, Newport) said that the hon. Member who had just sat down declared that the Bill was a ridiculous Bill. That might be his opinion, but there were hon. Members who differed from him, and their opinion was as good as his. Again, the hon. Gentleman said that those most concerned in the purity of beer were the manufacturers. That he entirely denied. The basis of the Bill was that it was the consumers who were principally concerned, and in the interests of the consumers he begged the House to read the Bill a second time.
*ME. GROVES said the hon. and gallant Gentleman had misinterpreted his meaning. What he meant when he said that the brewers were most concerned in the purity of beer was this;that unless they brewed good beer, to suit the popular taste, their trade and profits would very soon disappear and they might as well give up their business.
MR. RUTHERFORD (Lancashire, Darwen) said that the great objection which maltsters had to English barley was that it was often broken, and that
brewers had to provide machinery for dressing it. If agriculturists were to dress their barley they would receive better prices for it. Generally brewers used 75 per cent, of malt, 10 per cent, of maize, and 15 per cent, of sugar; and a certain proportion of malt must always be used, no matter what other substitutes were employed. The working man would have a glass of beer, and a clear beer that sparkled, and the brewer was compelled, therefore, to produce the article which
AYES.
Abraham, Wm. (Cork, N.E.)
Delany, William
Hozier, Hon. James Henry Cecil
Abraham, Wm. (Rhondda)
Dickinson, Robert Edmond
Hudson, George Bickersteth
Acland-Hood, Capt. Sir Alex. F.
Digby, John K. D. Wingfield-
Humphreys-Owen, Arthur C.
Aird, Sir John
Dilion, John
Button, John (Yorks. N. R.)
Allen, Chas. P. (Glouc,Stroud
Donelan, Captain A.
Jacoby, James Alfred
Ambrose, Robert
Doogan, P. C.
Jeffreys, Arthur Frederick
Arkwright, John Stanhope
Dorington, Sir John Edward
Johnston, William (Belfast)
Arrol, Sir William
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers
Jones, David Brynmor(Swans'a
Atherley-Jones, L.
Dunn, Sir William
Jones, William (Carnarvonsh.)
Bagot, Capt. Josceline FitzRoy
Dyke, Rt. Hn. Sir Wm. Hart
Joyce, Michael
Baldwin, Alfred
Edwards, Frank
Kearley, Hudson E.
Barlow, John Emmott
Esmonde, Sir Thomas
Kennaway, Rt. Hn. Sir John H.
Barry, E. (Cork, S.)
Evans, Sir Francis H (Maidstone
Kenyon-Slaney, Col, W. (Salop.
Bantley, George C. T.
Faber, George Denison
Lambert, George
Bayley, Thos. (Derbyshire)
Fellowes, Hon. Ailwyn Edward
Lambton, Don. Fredk. Win.
Beach Rt. Hn. W. W. B.(Hants.
Fenwick, Charles
Lawson, John Grant
Beaumont, Wentworth C. B.
Ffrench, Peter
Layland-Barratt, Francis
Bignold, Arthur
Field, William
Loamy, Edmund
Bill, Charles
Finch, George H.
Lee, A. H. (Hants., Fareham
Black, Alexander William
Firbank, Joseph Thomas
Leighton, Stanley
Boland, John
Flavin, Michael Joseph
Leveson-Gower, Fredk. N. S.
Bolton, Thomas Dolling
Flynn, James Christopher
Levy, Maurice
Boscawen, Arthur Griffith-
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir Henry
Lewis, John Herbert
Boulnois, Edmund
Furness, Sir Christopher
Lloyd-George, David
Bowles, Capt. H. F. (Middlesex)
Garfit, William
Lockwood, Lt.-Col. A. R,
Brand, Hon. Arthur C.
Gilhooly, James
Long, Col. Chas. W. (Evesham
Brassey, Albert
Goddard, Daniel Ford
Lough, Thomas
Brodrick, Rt. Hon. St. John
Godson, Sir Augustus Fredk.
Lowther, C. (Cumb., Eskdale)
Brookfield, Col. Montagu
Gore, Hon. F. S. Ormsby-
Lowther, Rt.Hn.James(Kent)
Brown, Alexander H.(Shropsh.
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir John Eldon
Loyd, Archie Kirkman
Brunner, Sir John Tomlinson
Goschen, Hon. George Joachim
Lucas, Reginald J. (Portsm'uth
Bull, William James
Goulding, Edward Alfred
Macdona, John Cumming
Burns, John
Graham, Henry Robert
MacDonnell, Dr. Mark A.
Burt, Thomas
Grant, Corrie
M'Arthur, William (Cornwall)
Caine, William Sproston
Green, AY. D. (Wednesbury)
M'Kenna, Reginald
Cameron, Robert
Grenfell, William Henry
M'Killop, James (Stirlingshire
Campbell, John (Armagh, S.)
Griffith, Ellis J.
M'Laren, Charles Benjamin
Carlile, William Walter
Gurdon, Sir W. Brampton
Malcolm, Ian
Carvill, Patrick Geo. Hamilton
Hall, Edward Marshall
Mansfield, Horace Kendall
Cautley, Henry Strother
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. Robt. Wm.
Markham, Arthur Basil
Cavendish, V.C.W(Derbyshire
Hardy, Laurence (Kent, Ashfd.
Massey-Mainwaring, Hn. W. F.
Cawley, Frederick
Hare, Thomas Leigh
Montagu, Hn. J. Scott (Hants.)
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. Henry
Harmsworth, R. Leicester
More, Robt. Jasper (Shropshire
Cochrane, Hon. Thos. H. A. E.
Hayden, John Patrick
Morgan, Hn. Fred. (Monm'thsh
Cogan, Denis J.
Heath, James (Staffords, N. W.
Morgan, J. Lloyd (Carmarthen)
Cohen, Benjamin Louis
Helme, Norval Watson
Morrison, James Archibald
Colston, Charles E. H. Athole
Hermon- Hodge, Robert Trotter
Morton, Arthur H. A. (Deptford
Colville, John
Hickman, Sir Alfred
Morton, E. J. C. (Devonport)
Condon, Thomas Joseph
Hobhouse, Hy. (Somerset, E.)
Mount, William Arthur
Corbett, T. L. (Down, North)
Hogg, Lindsay
Murphy, J.
Cremer, William Randal
Horner, Frederick William
Nannetti, Joseph P.
Cripps, Charles Alfred
Horniman, Frederick John
Nownes, Sir George
Cust, Henry John C.
Houldsworth, Sir Wm. Henry
Norton, Capt. Cecil William
Dalkeith, Earl of
Howard, Capt. J. (K'nt, Faversh
O'Brien, James F. X. (Cork)
Davies, Alfred (Carmarthen)
Howard, J. (Midd., Tottenham)
O'Brien, K. (Tipperary, Mid)
his consumer required. - Unless he did so he would very soon lose his custom. He did not think the Bill a good measure, nor did he believe it would accomplish the object of its promoters, and therefore he should vote against it.
Question put, "That the word 'now' stand part of the Question."
The House divided:;Ayes, 245; Noes, 133. (Division List No. 108).
O'Doherty, William
Robson, William Snowdon
Vincent, Col. Sir CEH (Sheffield
O'Donnell, T. (Kerry, W.)
Roe, Sir Thomas
Walrond, Rt. Hn. Sir William H
O'Mara, James
Rolleston, Sir John F. L.
Walton, John Lawson (Leeds, S.
O'Neill, Hon. Robert Torrens
Round, James
Walton, Joseph (Barnsley)
Orr-Ewing, Charles Lindsay
Sackville, Col. S. G. Stopford-
Warde, Lieut.-Col. C. E.
O'Shaughnessy, P. J.
Samuel, S. M. (Whitechapel)
Warner Thomas Courtenay T.
Palmer, Sir C. M. (Durham)
Scott, Chas. Prestwich (Leigh)
Warr, Augustus Frederick
Partington, Oswald
Scott, Sir S. (Marylebone, W.)
Webb, Colonel William George
Percy, Karl
Sharpe, William Edward T.
Weir, James Galloway
Perks, Robert William
Smith, H C (North'mb.Tyn's'de
Welby, Sir Charles G. E (Notts.)
Philipps, John Wynford
Smith, Samuel (Flint)
Wharton, Rt. Hon. John Lloyd
Pickard, Benjamin
Soames, Arthur Wellesley
White, George (Norfolk)
Pilkington, Richard
Spear, John Ward
White, Luke (York, E. R.)
Power, Patrick Joseph
Stevenson, Francis S.
Whitmore, Charles Algernon
Pretyman, Ernest George
Strachey, Edward
Wilson, Fred. W. (Norfolk, Mid
Price, Robert John
Stroyan, John
Wilson, John (Durham, Mid)
Priestley, Arthur
Start, Hon. Humphry Napier
Wilson, John (Falkirk)
Rankin, Sir James
Sullivan, Donal
Wilson, John (Glasgow)
Rasch, Maj. Frederic Came
Talbot, Rt. Hn. J. G. (Oxf. Univ.
Wilson-Todd, Wm. H.(Yorks.)
Reddy, M.
Taylor, Theodore Cooke
Wodehouse, Hn. Armine (Essex
Redmond, John E. (Waterford)
Thomas, Alfred (Glamorgan, E.
Wrightson, Sir Thomas
Rentoul, James Alexander
Thomas, David Alfred (Merthyr
Young, Commander (Berks, E.)
Renwick, George
Thomson, F. W. (York, W.R.
Younger, William
Rickett, J. Compton
Thorburn, Sir Walter
Yoxall, James Henry
Ridley, S. Forde (Bethnal Green
Tomkinson, James
Rigg, Richard
Tomlinson, Wm. Edw. Murray
TELLERS FOR THE AYES;
Roberts, John Bryn (Eifion)
Tufnell, Lieut.-Col. Edward
Mr. Purvis and Sir Cuthbert Quilter.
Robertson. Herbert (Hackney)
Valentia, Viscount
NOES.
Allhusen, Augustus H. Eden
Fletcher, Sir Henry
Molesworth, Sir Lewis
Anson, Sir William Reynell
Flower, Ernest
Mooney, John J.
Anstruther, H. T.
Foster, Sir Michael (Lon. Univ.
Morrell, George Herbert
Asher, Alexander
Greene, Sir EW (B'rySEdm'nds
Morris, Hon. Martin Henry F.
Ashmead-Bartlett, Sir Ellis
Greene, Henry D. (Shrewsbury
Moulton, John Fletcher
Asquith. Rt. Hon. Herbert H.
Groves, James Grimble
Murray, Col. Wyndham (Bath)
Austin, Sir John
Guthrie, Walter Murray
Myers, William Henry
Bain, Col. James Robert
Haldane, Richard Burdon
Nicholson, William Graham
Baird, John George Alexander
Halsey, Thomas Frederick
Nicol, Donald Ninian
Balcarres, Lord
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir William
Nolan, Joseph (Louth, South)
Balfour, Rt Hn Gerald W.(Leeds
Harwood, George
O'Brien, Patrick (Kilkenny)
Banbury, Frederick George
Hay, Hon. Claude George
O'Connor. T. P. (Liverpool)
Barry, Sir Francis T. (Windsor
Hayne, Rt. Hon. CharlesSeale-
O'Dowd, John
Beach, Rt.Hn.SirM. H. (Bristol
Heaton, John Henniker
O'Kelly, J. (Roscommon, N.)
Bigwood, James
Higginbottom, S. W.
O'Malley, William
Blundell, Colonel Henry
Hoare, Edw.Brodie(Hampste'd
Palmer, Walter (Salisbury)
Bond, Edward
Hobhouse, C.E.H. (Bristol,E.)
Pemberton, John S. G.
Boyle, James
Hutton, Alfred E. (Morley)
Platt-Higgins, Frederick
Brigg, John
Jackson, Rt. Hon. Wm. Lawies
Plummer, Walter R.
Brown, George M. (Edinburgh)
Jebb, Sir Richard Claverhouse
Powell, Sir Francis Sharp
Bryce, Rt. Hon. James
Joicey, Sir James
Ratcliffe, R. F.
Buxton, Sydney Charles
Kenyon, Hon. G. T. (Denbigh)
Redmond, William (Clare)
Caldwell, James
Kitson, Sir James
Reid, James (Greenock)
Cavendish, R, F. (N. Lancs.)
Knowles, Lees
Reid, Sir R. Threshie (Dumfries
Cecil, Evelyn (Aston Manor)
Labouchere, Henry
Remnant, James Farquharson
Chapman, Edward
Lawrence, William V.
Renshaw, Charles Bine
Charrington, Spencer
Leng, Sir John
Ridley, Hn. M. W. (Staly bridge
Clancy, John Joseph
Long, Rt. Hn. Walter (Bristol, S
Robertson, Edmund (Dundee)
Collings, Rt. Hon. Jesse
Lonsdale, John Brownlee
Ropner, Colonel Robert
Cook, Sir Frederick Lucas
Lowe, Francis William
Rutherford, John
Corbett, A.Cameron(Glasgow)
Lucas, Col. Francis (Lowestoft)
Sadler, Col. Samuel Alex.
Crean, Eugene
Lundon, W.
Sandys, Lieut. Col.Thos Myles
Crombie, John William
Lyttelton, Hon. Alfred
Skewes-Cox, Thomas
Cross, Herb. Shepherd (Bolton)
MacIver, David (Liverpool)
Smith, Abel H. (Hertford, E.)
Cubitt, Hon. Henry
M'Dermott, Patrick
Smith, James Parker(Lanarks.
Cullinan, J.
M'Fadden, Edward
Stewart, Sir. M. J. M'Taggart
Davies, Sir Horatio D.(Chath'm
M'Killop, W. (Sligo, North)
Talbot, Lord E. (Chichester)
Douglas, Charles M. (Lanark)
Maple, Sir John Blundell
Temant, Harold John
Fisher, William Hayes
Mappin, Sir Frederick Thorpe
Tollemache, Henry James
FitzGerald, Sir R. Penrose-
Maxwell, W. J. H. (Dumfriessh.
Trevelyan, Charles Philips
Fitzmaurice, Lord Edmond
Melville, Beresford Valentine
Ure, Alexander
Vincent, Sir Edgar (Exeter)
Whiteley, H. (Ashton u-Lyne
TELLERS FOR THE NOES;
Walker, Col. William Hall
Whitley, J. H. (Halifax)
Colonel Mil ward and Mr. Heywood Johnstone.
Wallace, Robert
Wilson, Henry J. (York, W. R.
White, Patrick, (Meath, North
Wodehouse, Rt. Hn. E. R. (Bath
Whiteley, George (York, W. R.
Wortley, Rt. Hon. C. B. Stuart-
Main Question put, and agreed to.
Bill read a second time, and committed for to-morrow.
MIDLAND RAILWAY BILL.
GRAVESEND GAS BILL.
Reported, with Amendments; Reports to lie upon the Table, and to be printed.
PUBLIC PETITIONS COMMITTEE.
Third Report brought up, and read; to lie upon the Table and to be printed.
Adjourned at twenty minutes before Six of the clock.
APPENDIX I.
STATEMENT EXPLANATORY OF NAVY ESTIMATES, 1901&#x2013;1902.
The Navy Estimates for 1901&#x2013;1902 amount to a net total of £;30,875,500, being an increase of £;2,083,600 beyond the amount of £;28,791,900 voted for the year 1900&#x2013;1901.
The Manning Vote (Vote 1) shows an increase of £;233,000, due in the main to the increased number of men last year and this year.
Vote 8, Shipbuilding, &amp;c., shows a net increase of £;1,274,900.
Vote 9, Armaments, is increased by £;161,800.
Vote 10, Works, is increased by £;137,300.
The remaining Votes show a net increase of £;276,600.
The comparison in every case is with the original Estimates of 1900&#x2013;1901 plus the additional Estimates voted in July, 1900.
NUMBERS.
The total number of Officers, Seamen and Boys, Coastguard, and Royal Marines proposed for the year 1901&#x2013;1902 is 118,635, being an increase of 3,745.
The additions proposed are to meet the needs of the Fleet, and are made up of;
287 Officers.
1.150 Seamen.
500 Stokers.
398 Miscellaneous.
310 Artizans (including 100 Electricians).
1,000 Marines.
100 Apprentices (Shipwrights and Coopers).
MOBILISATION.
The plans for strengthening and developing the system of Reserves, referred to in last year's Statement as under consideration, have been given effect to by the passing of an Act of Parliament to establish a new Reserve force, to be called the Royal Fleet Reserve. It will consist partly of men who have served in the Navy or Royal Marines and left without taking pension (Class B), and partly of men who have been pensioned (Class A). The Seaman Pensioner Reserve will be superseded eventually by the new Royal Fleet Reserve, but the present Royal Naval Reserve is not affected.
The first entries in the new force will be made from the first of March of this year, and it is hoped to eventually raise the numbers of Class B to 15,000. The men in the new Royal Fleet Reserve will undergo periodical drill.
In order further to facilitate mobilisation another Act of Parliament was also passed, enabling the Admiralty, when the Royal Naval Reserve is called by Royal Proclamation into actual service, to limit the numbers to be called out to such as may from time to time appear desirable.
The Coast Guard and Port Guard Ships, which heretofore have had only a portion of their crews on board, are now kept fully manned. An additional Coast Guard ship has been commissioned and established at Rathmullen, in Ireland.
THE ROYAL MARINES.
2,630 Recruits were raised for the Corps during the year 1900, the Artillery branch receiving 616 of this number, the remainder going to the Infantry Divisions.
For the Artillery branch the mean height was 5 feet 8 inches, for the Infantry 5 feet 6 inches.
The twelve months produced a wastage of 2,165, the largest for some years. More than half of this number were men time expired, pensioned, purchased, and invalided, most of whom will be eligible for entry in the new Reserve, and will probably join it.
During the past year directions have been given for the training in gunnery of the young officers Royal Marine Light Infantry to take place in the Gunnery School at Whale Island instead of at their Divisional Headquarters, in the same manner as the young officers Royal Marine Artillery, whereby uniformity of instruction is ensured.
A fuller recognition has been made of the eligibility of Marines for employment as Captains of Guns in H.M. Ships. A proportion of Marine Captains of Guns will in future be allowed in the complements of all Battleships and such First Class Cruisers as are Flagships; and a new auxiliary rating of Second Captain of Gun has been established by Order in Council for men of the Marine Infantry with an additional allowance of one penny per diem while borne on ships' books for the duty.
Musketry.;Twenty per cent. of the men on shore qualified as marksmen, 75 per cent. reaching the next stage of efficiency.
Reserve of Officers.;During the past year attention was directed to the fact that no specific regulation existed under which Retired Marine Officers could be recalled for service in case of emergency. A scheme has been prepared for the creation of a "Reserve of Officers, Royal Marines." It makes all officers who voluntarily retire liable to serve in this Reserve, those already on the Retired List or who may be retired compulsorily having the option of joining if under fifty.
Reserve of Men.;Taking advantage of the powers given to the Admiralty by the Naval Reserve Act of 1900, to raise and keep up a new Division of Reserves in addition to the men already authorised under the Act of 1859, steps were taken to incorporate in the new force a reserve of Royal Marines, and the raising of this Reserve is now in course of operation.
NAVAL RESERVES.
Executive Officers.;The establishment is fixed at 1,500, and there are now borne 436 Lieutenants, 517 Sub-Lieutenants, and 547 Midshipmen. Vacancies for Executive Officers are filled up as soon as they occur. There are no vacancies at present, and 330 qualified candidates are on the list of applicants for appointment.
The total number of Executive Officers now on the Active List, who have served for twelve months or more in the Navy, or are now undergoing twelve months training, is 295, an increase of 28 since last year.
Engineers.;The establishment of Engineer Officers is fixed at 400, and is complete. There are 15 candidates on the list of applicants for appointments.
The Instructional Courses for Engineers in the Home Dockyards, commenced in 1898, have been continued. Three courses of six Officers have been held each year, and arrangements are now being made to increase the number to 18 Officers for each course, or a total of 54 per annum. 32 Officers have been through the courses, and they have been satisfactorily reported on for conduct and attention. These Officers appreciate the instruction and experience afforded.
Seamen.;On the 31st December last the total number of seamen borne, as compared with the numbers voted, was:;
Class.
Number Voted, 1900&#x2013;1.
Numbers Borne.
31.12.00.
31.12.99.
Qualified Seamen
11,700
2,937
2,080
1st Class, old system
7,978
8,921
Seamen
11,300
4,218
3,406
2nd Class, old system
5996
7,555
Totals
23,000
21,129
21,962
1900
1899
Numbers embarked for six months Naval training
784
980
The falling off in numbers borne and in those embarking for naval training is attributed to the unpopularity of this compulsory training, owing to insufficient pay as compared with what the men earn at their proper vocations (fishing, yachting, merchant ships, &amp;c), and the length of time required to serve, which interferes with their employment. Arrangements are being made to readjust the pay and to reduce the period of training from six to three months, which it is hoped will induce more men to embark. Further, this embarkation will not be compulsory, except as regards earning promotion and future pension, and men who do not qualify for promotion to "Qualified Seamen" will be allowed to re-enrol as "Seamen" for a second and third period of five years, which at present is not allowed. We regret this unavoidable diminution of the training period; but it is believed that a readjustment of the system of instruction will go far to neutralise the loss of time.
The negotiations for the establishment of a branch of the Royal Naval Reserve in the North American Colonies, to which reference was made in last year's Statement, have been proceeded with, and 50 seamen from Newfoundland have been embarked in His Majesty's ships on the Station for six months training.
Firemen.;During the year 1900 there were 337 Firemen enrolled as compared with 544 in 1899, being a decrease of 207.
The numbers borne as compared with the numbers voted are:;
Borne, 31st December, 1900
3,530
Voted
3,600
Borne, 31st December, 1899
3,494
Voted
3,500
Drill Ships and Batteries.;The process of replacing the old M.L. guns by modern Q.F. guns is being continued, and arrangements are in hand to supply several 5-in. B.L. (converted to Q.F.) and Maxim guns during the forthcoming financial year.
CHANGES IN COMPOSITION OF FLEETS.
China.;The China Fleet has been considerably increased during the past twelve months. The Dido, Isis, and Astraea from the Mediterranean, the Arethusa from the Pacific, the Wallaroo, Mohawk, and Lizard from Australia, and the Marathon from the East Indies, were all sent to that Station during the disturbances last year for temporary service. Of these, the Marathon has returned to her Station, the Dido and Isis have been replaced by other Cruisers in the Mediterranean, and will remain in China; the Mohawk has been replaced in Australia, and is now returning home. The Glory, Argonaut, and two Destroyers (Otter and Janus) have been added to the Fleet in Chinese waters, and the Ocean left Malta 2nd February to join them. The Robin, River Gunboat, has been commissioned for service in the West River, and the Steamer Pioneer has been purchased and will be fitted as a gunboat for service on the Yangtse Kiang.
Mediterranean.;Eight Destroyers and four First Class Torpedo Boats have been added to the Mediterranean Fleet. The Hood has replaced the Ocean sent to China.
Home.;A Torpedo Gunboat (fitted with water-tube boilers) has been attached to each Home Port for the instruction of Engine Room Ratings in water-tube boilers.
The additions to the sea-going Fleet in Commission, enumerated above, involved complements to the extent of 7,269 Officers and Men.
It is worthy of note that these ships have been commissioned without reducing the personnel at Home below the strength required for mobilisation of the Ships in Reserve, without any interruption or diminution of the work of the various Schools and Training Establishments, and without drawing upon any of the Naval Reserve Forces. The ordinary reliefs on foreign stations, which were due during the latter portion of the year 1900, had unavoidably to be delayed, but are all now either being or about to be carried out.
Naval Brigades.;All Naval Brigades serving on shore in South Africa had returned to their ships by October, 1900.
A Naval Brigade participated in the, International advance to Peking, and, on the occupation of the city, returned to their ships.
The Government of South Australia offered the services of the South Australian Gunboat Protector for service in China during the disturbances of last year. The offer was accepted for four months, and the Protector served in China from September till the end of November. The Commander-in-Chief reported that the Protector was most useful, being an efficient and well kept man-of-war, reflecting credit on captain, officers, and men.
The Governments of New South Wales and Victoria similarly offered the services of Colonial Naval Brigades, consisting respectively of 300 and 200 officers and men for service in China. These offers were accepted, and the Brigades have been employed on shore under the General, where they did good service. They will return home by the end of March.
Losses.;The Second Class Cruiser Sybille went ashore at Lambert's Bay, in Cape Colony, on 16th January, and is reported to be a total wreck. One life was lost. The report of the Court Martial has not yet arrived. The Hind, Coast Guard Cruiser, was wrecked on the East Coast of England in November. No lives were lost. The River Gunboat Sandpiper sank during a typhoon at Hong Kong in November, but was successfully raised. One life was lost.
Man&#x0153;uvres.;The annual Man&#x0153;uvres took place, 49 ships and torpedo boats being specially commissioned for the purpose. Altogether 115 ships and vessels took part in the Man&#x0153;uvres, and over 30,000 officers and men. The total number of Coast Guard embarked was 45 officers and 1,711 men, and of Royal Naval Reserves 35 officers and 390 men.
COALING OF THE FLEET.
In order to facilitate the departmental administration of this service a slight change has been made in the Navy Estimates, whereby all incidental expenses, including craft, machinery, &amp;c, are provided for under the same subhead as the cost of the coal and its conveyance (Vote 8, Section 2, Subhead K). The works and buildings connected with coaling have also been grouped in one subhead of Vote 10.
Steps are in progress to organise and improve the coaling facilities at the several Naval Stations to ensure that the requirements of the Fleets can at all times be amply met. It is proposed to include the provision for the necessary expenditure in the forthcoming Naval Works Loan Bill.
Additions have been made to the coaling craft, and provision is included in the Estimates for 1901&#x2013;2 for further floating craft to be equipped with modern appliances. Provision is also made for the increase of reserve stocks of coal at certain Naval Stations abroad. The supervision of coaling duties at certain of the Naval Depots has been strengthened.
The system of supplying coal to Fleets and Naval Stations by colliers under Admiralty control or under the orders of the Commanders-in-Chief is working well, and will be extended as far as circumstances permit.
The experiments with Patent Fuel have been satisfactorily concluded, and suitable quantities will be stored to form adequate reserves at foreign stations.
Schemes for further trials with Liquid Fuel have been considered, and some manufacturers have undertaken to submit designs and particulars of trials. Two of these plans are about to be tried, one with a marine water-tube boiler on shore, and one, if the arrangements are suitable, on board H.M.S. Surly.
NAVAL TRAINING.
The training of officers and men has received and is receiving much attention from the Board.
The report of a Committee on the Training and Examination of Junior Officers, which was appointed in 1897, and the circular in which its recommendations have been embodied and issued to the Fleet, will be laid before Parliament. Sufficient time has not elapsed to show the result of the changes introduced, but any modifications shown to be necessary by experience will be adopted.
Special encouragement is being given to the better study of foreign languages; the seamanship examination has been revised by the Council of Education to meet the present conditions obtaining on modern warships; promotion to the rank of Lieutenant will not in future only depend upon success in examinations, but a certificate will be required to be obtained by every Sub-Lieutenant from his Commanding Officer after six months service in a ship of war at sea as to his fitness to take charge of a watch at sea and to perform efficiently his other duties as a Lieutenant.
A Naval Strategy course, including therein Strategy, Tactics, Naval History, and International Law, has been commenced at Greenwich for the benefit of the Senior Officer's at the Royal Naval College, and is being conducted by the Captain of the College. The Tactical courses at Portsmouth are being continued. All the officers going through these courses have been placed on full pay.
The Council of Naval Education has been directed to carefully scrutinise the Greenwich course with a view to ascertaining whether the matter and period of study of the Gunnery and Torpedo Lieutenants is that most adapted to the efficiency of the Service.
The system of training the men of the Navy is being constantly watched and revised with a view to increased efficiency. Great stress is being laid on efficiency in coaling; special arrangements have been made for training the stokers in the depots in the stoking of water-tube boilers; a scheme has been matured, and is
now under consideration, for transferring a large proportion of the instruction in gunnery from the Gunnery Schools to the seagoing Fleet, and for confining the further education in the Gunnery Schools to those seamen who show special aptitude, and who may, therefore, be selected for the advanced ratings of Captains of Guns and Captains of Turrets, or for the higher Torpedo ratings. There is no doubt but that the standard of proficiency in gunnery is steadily rising in the Navy. A large addition of practice ammunition for the Fleet was sanctioned in 1899, and a seagoing gunnery ship has been allotted to each of the Gunnery Schools, and will be attached as soon as ready.
NEW CONSTRUCTION.
There has been no relaxation of activity in shipbuilding and engineering operations generally during the past year, better progress having been made than in recent years with the ships under construction for the Royal Navy, and it is anticipated that the aggregate expenditure on new construction will closely approach the provision made in the Estimates, and will largely exceed that of any previous year.
The steps taken by the various contractors to increase the output of armour and machinery have begun to show their effect, and the rate of progress has greatly increased during the latter half of the year. This is especially the case with armour, the total output of which for Admiralty use in the present year will be from 45 to 50 per cent. greater than last year. The rate of delivery during the latter half of this year indicates that the new plant is now in effective working order. Moreover, a fifth firm has undertaken armour manufacture, and has advanced considerably with the necessary plant. The outlook in regard to the future supply of armour is, therefore, favourable.
The total output of new construction in the financial year now drawing to a close will probably exceed that of 1899&#x2013;1900, which was previously the greatest on record, by about a million.
Battleships.
The Glory has been completed and commissioned. The Albion has been delivered, and has commenced her trials, but I regret to say that defects in her machinery have been discovered which have postponed her completion.
The Vengeance, the last ship of the Canopus class, has been detained at Barrow in consequence of an accident to the entrance of the dock in which the ship was being completed. It is now reported that the works on the dock entrance are being rapidly pushed forward, and that they will probably be sufficiently advanced to permit the ship to pass out during April. Her trials and completion will be accelerated as much as possible after delivery.
The six battleships of the Formidable class, which were in hand in the dockyards at the beginning of the present financial year, have been considerably advanced, and two similar ships (the Queen and Prince of Wales) have been commenced. The Implacable has commenced her steam trials, and will be practically completed by the end of the financial year; her gunnery trials will probably be made rather later. It is anticipated that the Formidable and Irresistible will be completed early in the next financial year, and the Bulwark about December next. The London and Venerable will probably be finished about May, 1902.
The six vessels of the Duncan class have also been well advanced. Of the four building by contract, the Russell has been launched and the Duncan will be launched on 21st March, and the other two are very nearly in the same stage of progress. The Albemarle and Montagu, building in the dockyards, are to be launched on 5th March. All these vessels should be completed in 1902&#x2013;3.
Armoured Cruisers.
Twenty vessels are now in course of construction; six of the Cressy class, four of the Drake class, and ten of the Monmouth class.
The Cressy has been delivered within the contract date, and has satisfactorily completed her steam trials, exceeding her estimated maximum speed by nearly half a knot. Satisfactory preliminary trials have been made with the new type of mounting for her 9&#x00B7;2-in. guns, and the ship is now being prepared for service. Her gunnery trials will be carried out early in the next financial year.
The Sutlej has been delivered and the Aboukir will be delivered during the present financial year. Both ships will be made ready for trials immediately.
The completion of the Hogue at Barrow has been delayed by the same accident that has affected the delivery of the Vengeance. The Contractors are now making special arrangements to press forward the work on the ship.
The Bacchante has been launched, and the Euryalus is the only vessel of the class remaining on the building slips. Her launch has been deferred in consequence of the accident to the dock entrance at Barrow.
One vessel of the Drake class (the Good Hope) has been launched, and the Drake is to be launched before the present financial year closes. Equally satisfactory progress has not been made hitherto on the other two vessels of this class building by contract, but the contractors have been urged to make greater efforts, and have undertaken to do so.
Four of the vessels of the Monmouth class which were commenced last year have been considerably advanced. The first of these (the Kent) will have been launched before the close of the financial year, and two others will probably be launched about May next, and the fourth about August.
The remaining six vessels have been commenced recently, and the work on them will be advanced, before the present financial year closes, to a stage which will enable rapid progress to be made on them next year.
It will be seen from the above that four battleships and four armoured cruisers are expected to be launched during the last two months of this financial year.
Protected Cruisers.
The contractors' steam trials of the First Class cruiser Spartiate were not satisfactory, and the completion of the ship has been delayed by the necessity for replacing a condemned crank shaft.
The two Second Class cruisers of improved Hermes type (Challenger and Encounter), referred to in the statement of last year, have been commenced in the Dockyards. They are not sheathed with wood and copper, and are about a knot faster than the Hermes class. One of these vessels is to be fitted with Babcock and Willcox boilers.
Only one Third Class cruiser (the Pandora) has been in hand during the year. Her steam trials have still to be completed, but it is anticipated she will be practically ready for service at the close of the present financial year.
Sloops and Gunboats.
Eight sloops have been under construction during the year, six in the Dockyards and two by contract. The delivery of the latter has been considerably delayed, and they will not be completed as was anticipated this financial year. Two of the dockyard-built vessels will be completed this year, and two others will be finished next summer, when the contract-built ships should also be finished.
The remaining two vessels (Odin and Merlin) have been commenced at Sheerness during the present year.
Two gunboats of extremely light draught (the Teal and Moorhen) have been begun this year and are now well advanced. The work has been hindered by difficulties with material for boiler tubes, but it is anticipated that the vessels will be finished early in the next financial year.
Torpedo Boat Destroyers.
The total number of vessels in this class is now 113. Forty-two have trial speeds of 26 to 27 knots, and the whole of these have been completed and accepted. Four of this type, which, were originally completed with locomotive boilers, have now been fitted with water-tube boilers, and the whole of the 113 Torpedo Boat Destroyers now have water-tube boilers of the small tube or Express type.
Of the 30-knot vessels 58 have been delivered, of which two have not yet passed their trials, and the eight still remaining in the builders' hands are well advanced, one having passed her official trials and two others being now under trial.
Of the five Destroyers with trial speeds of over 30 knots two have been delivered and have completed their trials, viz., the Albatross, which attained 31&#x00BD; knots speed on trial, and the Viper, fitted with Parsons' Steam Turbine, which attained on trial a speed of over 33&#x00BE; knots, combined with an almost entire absence of vibration. The Cobra, which has similar machinery to that in the Viper, was tried with a load on board largely in excess of that usually carried on speed trials by Destroyers, and maintained for three hours a speed slightly above 30 knots.
A fourth vessel, of 32 knots speed, is expected to commence her preliminary steam trials about June next.
The fifth vessel (of 33 knots contract speed) has undergone a very long series of trials with propellers of varying dimensions, but the builders have not up to the present succeeded in attaining the guaranteed speed, and consequent delay in completion has resulted.
At the close of the financial year there will be 10 Destroyers ordered previously to 1900&#x2013;1901 still undelivered, but five additional vessels, not included in the original Estimates for the year, were purchased under an additional Estimate while in course of construction, and these will be delivered this financial year.
Torpedo Boats.
The two Torpedo Boats of 25 knots trial speed, ordered in 1899, are well advanced. The first will shortly commence her preliminary trials. The further two of the same type ordered this year are also well advanced, and it is expected that all four will have been delivered and tried by September next.
Royal Yacht.
The alterations in this vessel which were mentioned as necessary in last year's Statement have been made, and she has satisfactorily completed her steam trials during the year. These trials included three of 48 hours each, one at 5,000 h.p., and two at 7,500 h.p., and one trial of eight hours at 11,000 h.p. All the trials were carried out with complete success, the engines working with great smoothness and an almost complete absence of vibration. The maximum speed obtained was 20&#x00BC;4 knots, instead of the 20 knots promised in the design; and on two occasions the vessel ran at a speed of about 18&#x00BD; knots for 48 hours continuously.
Experiments made since the alterations show that the vessel will have ample stability, and her behaviour during her trials when experiencing a very strong breeze and considerable sea was very satisfactory.
The work of completing her internal decoration and fittings is now in hand.
Fleet Auxiliaries.
The provision of fleet auxiliaries is under the careful consideration of the Board. Three colliers are now working with the Fleet; a repairing and distilling ship has been purchased and is now being fitted up; provision is made in the Estimates for another distilling ship and for a depot ship, while it is expected that the Maine will, with the kind assistance of the Committee of American ladies and the owner, be secured for service as a hospital ship in the Mediterranean during the ensuing summer.
Royal Naval Reserved Merchant Cruisers.
During the year a new arrangement has been made with nearly all the great steamship companies, by which their finest vessels are held at the disposition of the Admiralty for employment as Armed Cruisers when required. Under the previous agreements only the Cunard, White Star, Peninsular and Oriental, and Canadian Pacific Railway Companies were included. To these have now been added the Orient, Royal Mail, and Pacific Companies. Eighteen of the largest and swiftest passenger steamers belonging to these companies will receive an annual subvention, and thirty steamers in addition are held at the disposition of the Admiralty without further subsidy. In the main features the new agreements will be similar to former agreements, but in some particulars modifications have been made based on experience.
Experiments.
During the year a number of experiments have been made on armour plates with a view to improvements in manufacture, or to the selection of the quality of armour best adapted for particular services.
An important firing trial was also carried out against H.M.S. Belleisle, and much valuable information was obtained which will be of service in future naval construction.
Submarine Boats.
Five submarine vessels of the type invented by Mr. Holland have been ordered, the first of which should be delivered next autumn.
What the future value of these boats may be in naval warfare can only be a matter of conjecture. The experiments with these boats will assist the Admiralty in assessing their true value. The question of their employment must be studied, and all developments in their mechanism carefully watched by this country.
MACHINERY AND BOILERS.
Between the preparation of last year's Statement and 31st March, 1900, the battleship Glory and the sloop Condor completed their contractors' trials, and the former vessel is now on the China station.
The following vessels have completed their contract steam trials during the present financial year:;
First Class Cruiser.;Cressy. Sloops.;Vestal and Shearwater, Torpedo Boat Destroyers.;16 in number. Royal Yacht.;Victoria and Albert.
In addition, the battleships Albion, Implacable, the First Class cruiser Spartiate, the Third Class cruiser Pandora, the sloop Mutine, and four Torpedo Boat Destroyers have commenced their trials.
The battleships Bulwark and Formidable and armoured cruiser Sutlej will be ready for trials early in the next financial year.
The Third Class cruiser Blanche has been reboilered, the double-ended cylindrical boilers being replaced by water-tube boilers of the small-tube type. She has completed her trials satisfactorily, and is now on foreign service. The sister vessel Blonde is now in hand for similar alterations.
The Torpedo Gunboats Niger and Gossamer are being re-engined and re-boilered with small-tube water-tube boilers, associated with light, quick-running engines. This is following on a similar course to that adopted last year with Skipjack and Speedwell, and provides an increase in the I.H.P. developed in the vessels from 3,500 to 6,000.
The Torpedo Boat Destroyers Havock, Hasty, and Charger, have had their locomotive boilers replaced by small-tube water-tube boilers, and the Havock has satisfactorily completed her trials with the new boilers.
The Torpedo Gunboat Seagull, recently fitted with water-tube boilers of the Niclausse type, has satisfactorily completed an exhaustive series of sea-going trials similar to those carried out in the Sharpshooter (Belleville) and Sheldrake (Babcock and Wilcox) during the preceding year.
These comparative trials in three similar ships have furnished valuable information regarding the different types of boilers; and as a result it has been decided to continue them on a larger scale, and boilers of the Babcock and Wilcox pattern have accordingly been ordered for the new Second Class Cruiser Challenger and the sloop Odin; the sloop Espi&#x00E8;gle was ordered to be fitted with these boilers in 1899&#x2013;1900, and she will be ready to commence her steam trials early in the ensuing financial year; and Niclausse boilers are to be fitted in the First Class Cruiser Suffolk and in the sloop Merlin.
The Second Class Cruisers Highflyer (Belleville Boilers) and Minerva (cylindrical boilers) carried out a series of comparative trials, the results of which were embodied in a Parliamentary Return.
The Boiler Committee appointed by Lord Goschen commenced their sittings in September last, but their experiments have not been concluded. The Minerva and the Second Class Cruiser Hyacinth (Belleville boilers) have been placed at the disposal of the Boiler Committee for comparative experiments. The Minerva's trials have commenced.
At the special request of the Board, an ad interim report has just been presented by the Committee in reply to certain specific questions specially addressed to it. This report will be laid before Parliament, and all outstanding orders for boilers will be immediately reconsidered, and, if necessary, revised in the light of the information afforded by this report.
The Torpedo Boat Destroyers Viper and Cobra, whose propelling machinery is of the turbine type, have completed their contract trials, obtaining high speeds. They will be further tested on service as soon as practicable. There are still many points connected with this system of propulsion which require experimental investigation.
DOCKYARDS.
Satisfactory progress has, on the whole, been made during the current year on New Construction in the Dockyards. It is anticipated that, despite some delays which have occurred in deliveries of armour and work on propelling machinery, and the large amount of repairing work performed on ships in Reserve, the amounts voted for labour and issue of ordinary materials, will in almost every respect be fully realised. Every endeavour is being made to attain this result.
The number of men employed in the Dockyards has been gradually increased during the year to meet the additional work thrown on them by the growth of the Fleet.
The number of workmen borne in the Home Dockyards on the 1st April, 1900, and on the 1st January, 1901, are as follows:;
April, 1900
28,833
January, 1901
30,330
Increase
1,497
This increased number includes about 690 Dockyard and Naval Artificer Apprentices who were entered in July, 1900.
LARGE REPAIRS during 1900&#x2013;1901 at HOME DOCKYARDS.
The following ships have been or will be completed in the Yards:;
Amphion.
Immortalite.
Anson.
Imperieuse.
Beagle.
Iphigenia.
Blanche.
Lapwing.
Camperdown.
Narcissus.
Eclipse.
Nymphe.
*Garnet.
Pallas.
Grafton.
Pegasus.
Harrier.
Rattler.
Hawke.
Revenge.
Hazard.
*Ruby.
Hebe.
Sparrow.
Hood.
Talbot.
Hussar.
*Tourmaline.
*Converting into Coal Hulks.
The following ships are now in hand, or their refit will be commenced during 1900&#x2013;1901:;
Barrosa.
Melpomene (if decided to proceed with Refit).
Blonde.
Doris.
Peacock.
Europa.
Pearl.
Fearless.
Pheasant.
Hecate.
Powerful.
Hermes.
Swallow.
Leander.
Venus.
The details of the Repairs and Refits to be carried out in 1901&#x2013;1902 appear in the Appendix to the Navy Estimates. The principal items of work to be undertaken in this section are:;
*Audacious.
Mohawk.
Barfleur.
Porpoise.
Centurion.
Spider.
Howe.
Tartar.
*Invincible.
Undaunted,
*Conversion into bases for Torpedo Boat Destroyers.
NEW SHIPBUILDING PROGRAMME.
We propose to lay down in the coining financial year;
3 Battleships.
6 Armoured Cruisers,
2 Third Class Cruisers.
10 Torpedo Boat Destroyers.
5 Torpedo Boats.
2 Sloops.
5 Submarine Boats (ordered and work commenced in 1900).
Of these 2 Battleships, 1 Armoured Cruiser, and 2 Sloops will be built in the Royal Dockyards. The rest will be built by Contract.
The total Vote proposed for New Construction is £;9,003,250, of which £;8,405,406 will be devoted to pushing forward the ships already in hand to the utmost of our power and to work on the submarine boats, and £;537,850 to start work on the additional ships to be commenced. The object aimed at in this distribution of the money is to advance the work on the many ships now under con-
struction as far as possible towards completion, and to place the ships to be newly commenced into such a position that the utmost possible amount of work can be put into them in 1902&#x2013;3.
The arrears in the delivery of hulls, armour-plates, guns, gun-mountings, and machinery has been a continual source of anxiety equally to the last and the present Board. The financial position of Messrs. Maudslay and of Messrs. Earle greatly contributed to the difficulties experienced in the deliveries of machinery. A Committee has been appointed to thoroughly investigate the causes of the arrears in every case, and to advise how a recurrence of the evil can best be obviated. The Committee consists of Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster, M.P., Rear-Admiral A. K. Wilson, C.B., V.C., Sir Thomas Sutherland, G.C.M.G., and Sir Francis Evans, K.C.M.G.
NAVAL ORDNANCE.
The amount required under the Naval Ordnance Vote is larger than the original Vote for 1900&#x2013;1901 by £;915,000. An additional Estimate of £;753,200 was, however, taken under this Vote during the year, so the net increase over 1900&#x2013;1901 is £;161,800.
A sum of £;420,000 is included in the Estimate in practical completion of the policy of increasing the reserves of guns and ammunition.
Provision is also included for the continuation of the issue of armour-piercing shell to the Fleet.
Deliveries of the new design of 12-in. B.L. wire gun have been made, and these guns are now mounted in the Battleships of the Formidable Class.
Some delay has occurred in the completion of the new 9&#x00B7;2 in. B.L. Guns, as the trial of the first gun showed that a slight modification of design was necessary. Deliveries are, however, now being made, the first two guns having been mounted in H.M.S. Cressy, and it is hoped that the guns for succeeding ships will be ready by the time they are required.
A new gun of 7&#x00B7;5-in. calibre has been tried satisfactorily, and has been approved.
A 5-in. B.L. gun has been converted to take the Welin breech screw, and the design has been approved.
Progress is being made each year with the re-armament of the Fleet with 303-in. Maxims in lieu of the older patterns of machine guns.
Telescopic sights have been adopted for Q.F. guns, and the supply is proceeding.
A new design of mounting for the 9&#x00B7;2-in. gun has been tried during the past year with very satisfactory results.
As the result of experience gained in South Africa and China some modifications and additions are being made to the seamen's equipment for service on shore.
Wireless telegraph apparatus has been obtained and supplied to a certain number of ships at homo and abroad.
NEW WORKS.
WORKS PROVIDED IN ESTIMATES.
Chatham.;Good progress has been made with the New Building Slip, Shops, &amp;c. The New Foundry will be completed early in next financial year.
Portsmouth.;Very satisfactory progress has been made with the New Smithery connected with it, and it is expected the work will be completed during next financial year.
Devonport.;Good progress has been made with the New Building Slip; the Shops will be commenced shortly.
Pembroke.;A contract has been made for the New Smithery, and considerable progress has been made. It is expected that the work will be completed in 1901&#x2013;1902.
Bermuda.;A contract has been made for the supply of the ironwork to be sent from England for the Bridge between Somerset and Watford Islands. The excavation of a berth for the floating dock at Bermuda will probably not be completed till 1902.
Dredging.;The deepening of French Creek at Malta has been progressing, and a considerable amount of dredging has been done at Wei-hai-Wei.
Coaling Depots.;A new Subhead has been introduced into Vote 10 in connection with coaling arrangements generally at Home and Abroad. Good progress is being made with the works already started at Chatham.
Hospitals.;Progress continues to be made with the work of providing additional and improved Hospital accommodation at Home and Abroad.
Naval Armaments.;The torpedo range at Portland is expected to be practically finished by the end of next financial year; the contract for the pier is nearly completed, and one for the superstructure has recently been made.
PROGRESS UNDER NAVAL WORKS LOAN ACTS.
Chatham.;Dock. A contract has been made, and the work is well in hand.
Colombo.;The new Dock at this Station is in hand, being built by the Colonial Government.
Malta.;Dockyard Extension. Tenders for this contract are under consideration. Dredging on sites of Wharf and Breakwater preparatory to their construction has been in progress for some time.
Dartmouth.;Britannia Royal Naval College. A contract for the main building and sick quarters has been made. Much work has been done in making roads, &amp;c.
Magazines.;Work is progressing satisfactorily; that at Portsmouth in particular being in an advanced condition. The scheme at Chatham comprises an entirely new establishment.
Hospitals.;The Infectious Hospital at Haulbowline is completed, and Haslar Hospital will be completed in 1901&#x2013;1902.
Inclosure and Defence of Harbours.
Gibraltar.;The Admiralty Mole Extension was brought up to water-level throughout its whole length by 30th September, 1898. The Quay Wall on the Harbour side of the Mole has been brought up to coping level for a distance of 2,358 feet. New Coal Sheds 750 feet in length have been completed on the Mole. The Detached Mole has been completed except portions of the upper structure and the round heads at the north and south extremities. On the Commercial Mole the reclamation and wharf wall are finished, and a portion of the new wharf has been opened for traffic. The Northern Arm is well advanced, and the Viaduct and Western Ann are well in hand.
Portland.;The whole of the new Breakwater was brought up to water-level on the 17th April, 1899, and the work is being increased to the full section. The facing of a portion of the Breakwater has been commenced.
Dover.;Admiralty Pier Extension.;The excavation for the foundation has been executed for about 450 feet, and block setting is in progress. The foundation course has been laid for a length of 440 feet, and the blockwork has been completed for a length of 260 feet at low water level. The work at the junction with the existing Pier Head has been carried up to within two courses of low water.
East Reclamation.;The wall is now practically complete to cope level for a length of about 1,250 feet. Considerable progress has been made with the filling at the back of the wall, and the Eastern half of the Blockyard is now being laid out.
East Arm and Root Wall.;Ten Bays of the East Arm temporary Staging have now been completed. Two goliaths, one 60 tons and one of 40 tons, are in use on this staging, and a second machine for 40 ton loads is in course of erection. About 400 feet of the foundations have been completed in the Root Wall, and about 100 feet of the East Arm above low-water level; a considerable quantity of concrete-in-mass has been deposited, and some of the Root Wall blocks have been set.
Adapting Naval Ports to Present Needs of Fleet.
Deepening Harbours and Approaches.;The dredging is finished at Chatham and Haulbowline. The dredging of Portsmouth Harbour is still in progress. The removal of the Vanguard, Rubble Bank, and Cremyll Shoals at Devonport is completed. The dredging above Saltash Bridge is in hand.
Keyham Dockyard Extension.;Graving Dock No. 4.;Side and end walls are complete. Excavation between the side walls is practically completed. Concreting under the floor is completed for a length of 375 feet.
Graving Dock, No. 5.;Excavation of rock is nearly completed, and setting of granite floor stones has been commenced.
Graving Dock, No. 6.;Good progress is being made in the excavation of the rock.
Entrance Lock.;The west wall is built to underside of coping for a length of 300 feet, and for the remaining length to level of 8 feet below coping. On site of floor and east wall the mud is being removed.
Closed Basin.;The North Wall is nearly completed, East Wall is completed. A length of 640 feet of West Wall has been constructed up to levels varying from 38 feet to 15 feet below coping. Excavation for Caisson Camber at entrance is in progress. Excavation of mud on site of basin has been continued.
Tidal Basin.;East and South Walls, also South Arm at entrances, are completed.
Outer Wall.;The wall is in progress and has been built to level of 3 feet below coping for a length of 160 feet at South end.
Gibraltar Dockyard Extension.;The Reclamation is in progress; pile foundations are being driven, and the superstructures of the Chief Constructor's and Chief Engineer's shops are in hand. The excavation of the New Mole Parade and the retaining Walls have been completed. The excavation for No. 1 Dock is in progress. The dam for No. 3 Dock is finished; the enclosed area is pumped dry, and the excavation is in progress.
Hong Kong.;The Contractors have commenced the work of constructing the dock, reclaiming land, providing wharf walls and a basin, and erecting additional shops.
Simon's Bay Dockyard Extension.;A tender has been accepted for this work. The necessary land has been acquired, and the houses on the property are being converted into quarters.
Naval Barracks, &amp;c.
Chatham Naval Barracks.;The West Block of the Seamen's Quarters is nearly completed, and the two remaining blocks are well in hand. The Officers' Mess and the North and South Blocks of Officers' Quarters are approaching completion.
Sheerness Naval Barracks.;The proposal to build new barracks for the Gunnery School at Sheerness has been abandoned, as the only available site was found on examination to be unsuitable on sanitary grounds. Negotiations for a site at Chatham are in progress.
Portsmouth Naval Barracks.;The War Office have transferred the Anglesea Barracks and have arranged for the transfer of further land required on the site of the Military Hospital. One block of Seamen's Quarters is up to roof level; the second block is up to second-floor level, and the third block has been commenced.
Keyham Naval Barracks.;The Eastern block of Seamen's Quarters is practically finished; the western block is nearly finished. The Officers' Mess and Quarters are roofed in.
Chatham Naval Hospital.;The work is in hand, and some of the buildings are up to first-floor level.
A Naval Works Loan Bill to provide during the next two years for certain new works and for the expenditure on works already authorised will shortly be introduced.
SELBORNE.
1st March 1901
APPENDIX II.
PUBLIC BILLS
DEALT WITH IN VOLUME XCI.
Those marked thus * are Government Bills. The figures in parentheses in the last column relate to the page in this volume. "[H.L.]" following the title indicates that the Bill originated in the Lords.
(A.) HOUSE OF LORDS.
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
*Berwickshire County Town [H.L.]
Lord Balfour
Committee, Report, 19 Mar. (369); Read 3a 21 Mar. (667)
County Courts (Ireland)
Lord Ashbourne
Read 2a 15 Mar. (45)
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) [H.L.]
Bishop of Winchester
Read 2a 21 Mar. (642)
Licensing Board [H.L.]
Earl of Camperdown
Read 1a 18 Mar. (215)
Licensing Law Amendment [H.L.]
Lord, Windsor
Read 1a 26 Mar. (1266)
Military Instruction (Schools and Cadets) [H.L.]
Viscount de Montmorency
Read 1a 25 Mar. (1063)
Polling Arrangements (Parliamentary Boroughs) [H.L.]
Lord Ribblesdale
Read 1a 21 Mar. (639)
Polling Districts (County Councils) [H.L.]
Lord Ribblesdale
Read 1a 21 Mar. (639)
Prevention of Corruption [H.L.]
Lord Alverstone
Read 1a 22 Mar. (834)
*Prisons (Scotland) [H.L.]
Lord Balfour
Read 2a 19 Mar. (366)
Public Libraries [H.L.]
Lord Windsor
Read 2a 18 Mar. (211); Committee, 25 Mar. (1063)
(B.) HOUSE OF COMMONS.
Title of Bill
Brought in by.
Progress.
Aged Pensioners
Mr. Goulding
Read 1&#x00B0; 22 Mar. (929)
*Army (Annual)
Mr. Brodrick
Read 1&#x00B0; 25 Mar.(1155)
Beer
Mr. Purvis
Read 2&#x00B0; 27 Mar. (1441)
*Berwickshire County Town [H.L.]
;
Read 1&#x00B0; 22 Mar. (882)
Burial Grounds (Loans) (Scotland)
Capt. Sinclair
Read 1&#x00B0; 15 Mar. (129.)
Title of Bill.
Brought in by
Progress.
*Consolidated Fund (No. 1)
Sir M. Hicks Beach
Read 1&#x00B0; 25 Mar. (1263); Read 2&#x00B0; 26 Mar. (1387); Com. 27 Mar. (1441)
County Justices' Clerks
Mr. Lloyd Morgan
Read 1&#x00B0; 22 Mar. (928)
Cremation [H.L.]
;
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar. (422)
Crofters' Holdings (Scotland)
Mr. Cathcart Wagon
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar. (426)
Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act (1886) Amendment
Mr. Weir
Read 1&#x00B0; 15 Mar. (129)
*Demise of Crown
Sir Rt. Finlay
Read 1&#x00B0; 25 Mar. (1126)
*Electric Lighting (London)
Mr. Gerald Balfour
Read 1&#x00B0; 26 Mar. (1387)
Foreigners' Marriages
Mr. Macdona
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar. (426)
Home Industries
Mr. Charles Douglas
Read 1&#x00B0; 26 Mar. (1387)
Housing of the Working Classes
Dr. Macnamara
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar.(425); Withdrawn 22 Mar. (881)
Housing of the Working Classes and Rating
Dr. Macnamara
Read 1&#x00B0;26 Mar. (1386)
*Isolation Hospitals
Mr. Walter Long
Read 1&#x00B0; 21 Mar. (743)
Libel
Sir John Willox
Read 1&#x00B0; 15 Mar. (128)
Local Authorities Officers' Superannuation
Major Rasch
Read 1&#x00B0; 22 Mar (929)
Military Instruction (Schools and Cadets)
Sir J. Kennaway
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar. (425)
Old Age Pensions (No. 5)
Mr. Bonsfield
Read 1&#x00B0; 20 Mar. (632)
Registration of Clubs
Mr. Caine
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar. (427)
Registration of Firms
Mr. Emmott
Read 1&#x00B0; 22 Mar. (929)
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children
Mr. Crombie
Read 2&#x00B0; 20 Mar. (565)
School Board Electorate (Scotland)
Mr. Weir
Read 1&#x00B0; 15 Mar. (128)
Sites Values (London) Rating
Mr. Sydney Buxton
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar. (426)
*Summary Jurisdiction (Ireland)
Mr. Atkinson
Read 1&#x00B0; 19 Mar. (427)
Weights and Measures
Mr. Bousfield
Read 1&#x00B0; 20 Mar. (631)
APPENDIX III.
HOUSE OF COMMONS. SESSION 1901.
LIST OF RULES, ORDERS, &amp;C, which have been presented during the Session, and are required by Statute to lie for an appointed number of Days upon the Table of the House.
[Continuation of List given in preceding Volume.]
Title of Paper.
Date from which the Period runs.
Period to lie upon the Table.
Board of Education,;Copy of Revised Regulations of the 21st March, 1901, as to certificates of Age, Proficiency, and School Attendance [39 and 40 Vic., c. 79, s. 24]
25 March
One month
Inebriates Acts, 1879 to 1899 (Rules for Retreats),;Copy of Rules for Retreats licensed under the Inebriates Acts, 1879 to 1899, dated 28th February, 1901, approved by the Secretary of State for the Home Department, in substitution for the Rules dated 18th October, 1900 [61 and 62 Vic., c. 60, s. 21 (1)]
26 March
4 weeks (whilst the House is sitting)
Land Transfer Act, 1897,;Copy of Order in Council of 9th March, 1901, postponing the operation of the Land Transfer Order in Council of 18th July, 1898, as regards the city of London until the 1st January, 1902 [60 and 61 Vic., c. 65, s. 20 (9)]
26 March
40 days
Factory and Workshop Acts (Manufacture of Earthenware and China),;Copy of Amended Special Rules for the Manufacture of Earthenware and China [58 and 59 Vic., c. 37, s. 28 (1)]
27 March
40 days
Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act, 1899,; Copy of Amending Genera] Order for the Regulation of Proceedings under and in pursuance of The Private Legislation Procedure (Scotland) Act, 1899 (62 and 63 Vic., c. 47, s. 15(3)]
27 March
One month
INDEX TO THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
[AUTHORISED EDITION].
THIRD VOLUME OF SESSION 1901.
MARCH 15;MARCH 27.
EXPLANATION OF ARRANGEMENT AND ABBREVIATIONS.
Bills: Read First, Second, or Third Time&#x003D;1R., 2R., 3R. [c.]&#x003D;Commons.[l.]&#x003D;Lords. Amendt.&#x003D;Amendment. Os.&#x003D;Observations. Qs.&#x003D;Questions. As.&#x003D;Answers. Com.&#x003D;Committee. Con.&#x003D;Consideration. Where in the Index * is added with Reading of a Bill, or a Vote in Committee of Supply, it indicates that no Debate took place on that Stage of the Bill, or on that Vote. Subjects discussed in Committee of Supply are entered under their headings, and also under Members' Names, without reference to the actual Vote before the Committee.
A
Aberdeen, Earl of
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 655.
Aberdeen University
Abstract of Accounts, Copy Presented, Mar. 22, 846; Mar. 25, 1062.
Abraham, Mr. W. [Glamorgan, Rhondda]
Coronation Oath;Referring to Committee on King's Declaration against Roman Catholicism, Mar. 19, 421.
Accession Oath
(see Sovereign's Oath on Accession Bill).
Admiralty
First Lord;Rt. Hon. Earl of Selborne.
Secretary;Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster.
Civil Lord of the Admiralty;Mr. E. G. Pretyman.
Administration
Overworked Staff, no time to initiate Reforms, etc., Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 785; Mar. 22, 980.
(see also Navy).
Africa, Central
British Central Africa Rifles, Employment of in Somaliland, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19, 497.
Africa, East
British Protectorate Finance, Increase in Supplementary Vote;Military Operations, Slave Question, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19, 479.
Somaliland, see that title.
Africa, South
Cape Colony, Transvaal, etc., see those titles.
War, see South African War.
Africa, West
Ashanti, see that title.
Gold Mining Companies;Tax on Gross receipts
Q. Mr. M'Dermott; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1356.
Labour Laws;Return
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 71.
West African Frontier Force, Employment of with reference to the Ashanti Rising, etc.
Os. Mr. S. Buxton, Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 351
Aged Pensions Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 22, 929.
Agriculture, Board of
President;Rt. Hon. R. W Hanbury.
Annual Reports Presented, Mar. 26, 1265. 1348
Agricultural Land Rating Act
Renewal
Q. Mr. Levy; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1385
Petitions against, Mar. 20, 557; Mar. 26, 1346.
Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act, 1899
Section 17, Sub-section (a);Operation of Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1371.
(see also Ireland).
Alderley, Lord Stanley of
Took the Oath, Mar. 18, 197.
Aldershot
Army School;Suicide of Schoolmaster
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21,701.
Alderson, Mr. E. H.
Appointment as Reading Clerk to the House of Lords and Clerk of Out door Committees
Motion (Earl of Halsbury), Mar. 15, 3.
Allan, Mr. W. [Gateshead]
Boilers;Water Tube Boilers, Belleville Type;Report of Committee, etc., Mar. 21, 793.
Allen, Mr. W. [Newcastle-under-Lyme]
Paardeberg Battle;Gen. Colvile's Report, Mar. 15, 60.
Allhusen, Mr. A. H E. [Salisbury]
Army;Commissions from the ranks, Outfit Grants, Mar. 18, 223.
Prisoners;Letters to the Press, Case of convict Bennett, Mar. 19, 408.
Ambrose, Dr. R. [Mayo, W.]
Castlebar District Lunatic Asylum;Rate in aid, Mar. 21, 729.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 911.
America
(see United States).
Ammunition
Mark IV. Ammunition, see Bullets.
Ancient Monuments, India
(see India).
Ancona
Trade Report Presented, Mar. 21, 636.
Anglo-German Agreement
(see China;Anti-Foreign Rising).
Animals
Diseases of Animals, see that title.
Annuities
(see National Debt).
Antrim Assizes
White's, Sir G., Claim for damages to Property
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 25, 1117.
Applecross
Cart Road, Construction of, to Shieldaig
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 18, 239.
Apples and Pears
Growth of;Experiment Stations proposed
Q. Sir J. Rankin; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 22, 855.
Appointments
Demise of the Crown;Bill to Render Unnecessary Fresh Appointments to Office on the Demise of the Crown
Finlays, Sir R., Statement, Mar. 25, 1126.
Araheera
Erection of Boatslip, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 873.
Archdale, Mr. E. M. [Fermanagh, N.]
Naval Boatswain's Pay Grievance, etc., Mar. 25, 1147.
Arlesley Gas Bill
l. Report,* Mar. 22, 833.
Armagh to Kingscourt Railway
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 711.
Army
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. St. John Brodrick.
Under Secretary;Lord Raglan.
Financial Secretary;Lord Stanley.
Account-keeping;Relieving Squadron and Company Officers of Responsibility, etc.
Q. Mr. Tomkinson; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1352.
Aldershot, see that title.
Army Corps;Government Military Proposals
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 15, 158, 166, 184, 185.
Volunteers and Militia, Battalions for
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 130.
Artillery;Increase in, etc.
O. Mr. C. Warner, Mar. 15, 153.
Auxiliary Forces;Lord Wolseley's failure to supervise, etc.
Os. Lord Wolseley, Mar. 15, 8; Marquess of Lansdowue, 20.
Barracks, see names of Barracks.
Bullets, see that title.
Cavalry
Cost of Living in the Army, see subheading Officers;Expenses.
Training and Re-arming;Army Reform
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 154.
Chaplains;Lawless Ritualistic Societies
O. Mr. S. Smith, Mar. 15, 182.
Coaling Stations, Garrisoning, etc., see Coaling Stations.
Colvile, Gen., see Colvile.
Commander-in-Chief
Duties of;Training and Discipline of the Army, etc.
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 131.
(see also title War Office;Administration).
Commissions from the Ranks;Outfit Grants
Q. Mr. Allhusen; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 18, 223.
Compulsory Service;Mr. Brodrick's Statement
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 135, 144, 150, 167, 177.
Contracts
Earthenware Goods;Use of Leadless Glaze
Q. Mr. Talbot; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1364.
Forage and Meat;Foreign Produce Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 188.
Guns, see that sub-heading.
Cost of Living in the Army, see sub-heading Officers;Expenses.
Establishment before South African War
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1092.
Examinations;French Syntax, Decree of French Minister of Education
Q. Mr. Pierpoint; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1092.
Expenditure
Financial Effect of the Government Military Proposals.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 171.
Increase in Expenditure;Colonial Contributions
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 173.
Forage;Home and Foreign Grown, Prices, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 188.
Garrison Battalions for Service in the Mediterranean, etc., Proposal
Debate on the Estimates, Mar 15,155.
Gibraltar, Cuby's Bank Failure;Regimental Losses, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1092.
Guns;Purchased Abroad
Germany, Purchase of Field Guns;Defects, etc.
Q. Mr. Renwick; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 63.
Number Purchased
Q. Mr. Langley; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 66.
Hospitals;Replacing Barrack Forms by Chairs
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 66.
India, see that title.
Kits;Infantry Soldiers' Shirt Allowance
Qs. Mr. K. Hardie; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 700; Mar. 26, 1354.
Land Forces, Number of Men, etc., Vote for Mar. 15, 152.
Mark IV. Ammunition, see title Bullets.
Meat;Home and Foreign Meat, Prices, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 189.
Medical Department
Civilian Doctors and Veterinary Surgeons at Home Stations;Rate of Pay
Q. Mr.Randles; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 63.
South African Hospitals Committee Report
Debate in Committee of Supply, Mar. 19, 517.
Military Man&#x0153;uvres Act, 1897, Amendment Bill
Q. Col. Brookfield; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1093.
Military Works Acts;Estimate of Expenditure
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Sir M. H. Beach Mar. 26, 1359.
Militia, see that title.
Mounted Infantry Regiments
O. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 178.
Navy and Army Establishments;Conflicting Interests
O. Mr. Macartney, Mar. 22, 959.
Numbers v. Value of Men and their Training
Dilke, Sir C., on, Mar. 15, 140.
Officers
Discipline, Improvement in
O. Col Brookfield, Mar. 15, 168.
Education;Army Classes in Public Schools
O. Lord Monkswell, Mar. 19,385.
Expenses of Officers;Price of Uniforms, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15,. 149, 168, 175, 180.
Half Pay and Retired Pay Declarations
Q. Mr. Stopford-Sackville; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1090.
Instruction for
Bedford's, Duke of, Proposals, Mar. 19, 381.
Os. Lord Raglan, Lord Monks-well, 385.
Number of Generals;Expenditure and Extravagance of our Army System
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 159, 104.
Reserve of Officers;Requiring Officers to serve with Provisional Regiments, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1352.
Selection of Officers
O. Mr. E. Robertson, Mar. 15, 174.
Temporary Staff Officers;Outlit Allowance
Q. Capt. Norton; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 18, 223.
Training;Government Reform Proposals
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 149.
Ordnance Factories, Vote for, Mar. 15, 187.
Ray
American Army Pay
O. Mr. A. Lee, Mar. 15, 144.
Comparisons with Pay of the Colonials
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 138
(see also South African War).
Inadequate Pay
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 165.
Pay, Allowances, etc., Vote for, Mar. 15, 181.
Pensions
Beatty, H., Case of
Q. Mr. Clancy; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 66.
Disabled Soldiers
Debate (Lords), Mar. 25, 1072.
Guinan, P., Case of
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19, 402.
Widows and Orphans of Soldiers who have fallen in South Africa, see South African War.
Recruiting;Government Reform Proposals Omissions
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 139.
Recruits;Under-age Recruit, G. H. Over
Q. Col. Brookfield; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 700.
Reforms and Reorganisation;Government Proposals
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15,129.
Difficulty of getting Men
O. Col. Brookfield, Mar. 15, 167.
Reinforcements for South Africa;Sending untrained Men into the Field
Dilke, Sir C, on, Mar. 15, 140.
Reserve
Garrison Battalions Proposal
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 155.
Increase in;Abolition of Militia Reserve, etc.
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1354.
Royal Reserve Regiments;Total Strength on Mar. 1, etc.
Q. Major Rasch; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1089.
Salisbury Plain;Police Arrangements
Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1353.
Sandhurst, Royal Military College;Board of Visitors' Report, Mar. 21, 635, 694.
Schools
Departmental Committee;Names of Members, etc.
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1093.
Inadequacy of Staff;Suicide of Aldershot Schoolmaster
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 701.
Secretary of State for War, Position of, Responsibility, etc.
Debate (Lords), Mar. 15, 7.
Separate Army System for India
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 134.
Shoeburyness;Medical Arrangements for Officers
Q. Mr. Bartley; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 19, 401.
Short Service Army to fill the Reserves for War
Dilke, Sir C, on, Mar. 15, 133.
South African War, see that title.
Staff Reorganisation on basis similar to that of the General Staff in Berlin
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1354.
Swiss Military System;Publishing Information with regard to
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 66.
Training
Control of under Commander-in-Chief
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 131.
Government Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, etc
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 149.
Under Age Recruits, see sub-heading Recruits.
Veterinary Department;Civilian Surgeons, Pay at Home Stations
Q. Mr. Randles; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 63.
Volunteers, see that title.
War Office, see that title.
Woolwich, Royal Military Academy
Board of Visitors' Report, Mar. 21, 635, 693.
Cadets wearing Shamrock on St. Patricks' Day
Q. Capt. Donelan; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1353.
Yeomanry, see that title.
Army (Annual) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 25, 1155.
Army Estimates
Land Forces (450,000), Com. Mar. 15, 152; Rep.* Mar. 21, 812; Mar. 25, 1155.
Pay Allowances, etc.;£;21,657,500, Com. Mar. 15, 181; Rep.* Mar. 21, 812.
Supplementary Estimates
Ordnance Factories;£;100, Rep* Mar. 15, 187.
South African War, Additional Expenditure
Provisions, Forage, etc.;£;1,000,000, Rep.* Mar. 15, 186.
Transports and Remounts;£;2,000,000, Rep* Mar. 15, 186.
Arnold-Forster, Mr. H. O.;Secretary to the Admiralty [Belfast, W.]
Administration of the Navy;Overworked Staff, No time to initiate Reforms, etc., Mar. 22, 980.
Armour-piercing Shell, Mar. 22, 975.
Australian Station;Disappearance of Vote 16 from the Navy Estimates, Mar. 22, 977.
Boilers;Water-tube Boilers
Belleville Boilers, Retention of, in Ships now in course of Construction, etc., Mar. 19, 403.
Report of Committee, etc., Mar. 22, 983; Mar. 23, 1048.
"Britannia," Influenza Outbreak;Outbreak on St. Vincent, etc., Mar. 15, 68.
Chaplains;Roman Catholic Chaplains on H.M. Ships, Mar. 21, 750; Mar. 23, 1049; Mar. 25, 1090.
Colonial Contributions towards Defence of the Empire, Mar. 22, 979; Mar. 25, 1146.
Contracts
Earthenware Goods;Use of Leadless Glaze, Mar. 26, 1364.
Penalties for Delays, Mar. 26, 1356.
Pork Contracts;Expenditure in Ireland, Mar. 26, 1382.
Cromarty Firth;Proposed Naval Station, Mar. 25, 1096.
Engineers, Position of, etc., Mar. 23, 1009.
Expenditure;Shipbuilding Standard of Two Naval Powers, Mar. 22, 978.
First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 313.
Replies to Questions and Criticisms, Mar. 22, 975; Mar. 23, 1007; Mar. 25, 1146.
Fleets, etc.;Comparative Statement as to the Strength of the Active List of the Navies of the World;Return, Mar. 15, 69; Mar. 25, 1132.
Gaya Bay;Establishment of Naval Station proposed, Mar. 15, 70.
Ireland and Naval Construction
Amount spent in Ireland, etc., Mar. 15, 69; Mar. 20, 1381, 1382.
Londonderry Industry;Admiralty Contracts, Mar. 26, 1383.
Irish Fisheries, Employment of Gunboats for Protection of, Mar. 23, 1008, 1048; Mar. 25, 1122.
"Jackal," H.M.S.;Leave of Absence for Officers and Men, Mar. 18, 225.
Marines;Pension Regulations, Mar. 19, 404.
Nationality of Personnel;Return, Mar. 26. 1356.
Pensions for Widows and Orphans of Soldiers and Sailors who have fallen in South Africa, Mar. 22, 981.
Piers and Harbours not under Admiralty Control, Mar. 23, 1046, 1047.
Powder, New Powder, New Guns, etc., Mar. 22, 988.
Royal Fleet Reserve, Mar. 22, 981.
School of Strategy at Greenwich, Mar. 22, 981.
Shipbuilding
Amount Spent in 1899, 1900, Mar. 21, 703.
Arrears, Mar. 22, 976, 982.
Shipwright Ratings, Mar. 25, 1095.
Stokers, Training of, and the Belleville Boilers, Mar. 22, 986.
Submarine Boats, Mar. 22, 976, 1048.
Subsidized Cruisers, Numbers, etc., Mar. 22, 977.
"Sybille," H.M.S., Wreck of;Officers and Men on Duty, Mar. 21, 702.
Training;Masts and Yards Training, Mar. 22, 980.
Training Ship Cruises;Visit to Stornoway, etc., Mar. 22, 852.
Turbine Machinery Tests;"Viper" and "Cobra," Mar. 22, 852.
Victualling of the Navy, Mar. 23, 1047.
Warrant Officers, Treatment of, Mar. 22, 982; Mar. 23, 1008.
Wireless Telegraphy, in the Navy, Mar. 26, 1355.
Arran Islands
Fever Outbreak;Choice of Nurse, Visits of Medical Inspectors, etc.
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25. 1113.
Ashanti Rising
Annual Tribute towards Military Operations, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 339; Mar. 19, 431.
Causes of the Rising
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 430.
Destruction of Towns and Villages;Food Supply, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Dermott; A. Mr. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1357.
Fines extracted from the Chiefs by the Residents
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 344, 345.
Gold Mines, Discovery of, cause of the troubles in Ashanti, alleged
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 348; Mar. 19, 433, 437, 441, 446.
Gold Ornaments of King Prempeh;Policy of Loot, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 339.
Golden Stool, Inquest of
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 342; Mar. 19, 432.
Governor Sir F. Hodgson;Mr. Buxton's Attack on, Mar. 18, 345, 346, 347.
O. Mr. Chamberlain, 355.
Military Operations, etc.
Correspondence relating to Presented, Mar. 18, 200
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 430.
Ashbourne, Lord;Lord Chancellor of Ireland
County Courts (Ireland) Bill, 2R., Mar. 15, 45.
Ashmead Bartlett, Sir E. [Sheffield, Ecclesall]
Army Horses, Expenditure on Horses for South Africa, etc., Mar. 15, 189.
Ashanti Rising;Military Expedition, Mar. 19, 443.
China;Anti-Foreign Rising
British Fleet in Gulf of Pechili;Russia's attempt to exclude, etc., Mar. 18, 226.
Manchuria;Russo-Chinese Agreement, Mar. 21, 706; Mar. 26, 1357.
Tientsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 19, 404.
Yang-tsze Valley- British Influence, Mar. 18, 227.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1432.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 890.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office;Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1233.
South African War
Parcels Postage Bates, Mar. 18, 225
Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals, Mar. 19, 397.
Supply
Procedure;Alteration in Form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes and Putting as Lump Sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 261; Mar. 19, 430.
Vote on account;Insufficient Discussion, Mar. 25, 1244.
Asquith, Rt. Hon. H. H. [Fife, E.]
Army Reform Proposals;Discussion on, Mar. 15, 185.
London Water (Purchase) Bill 2R., Mar. 26, 1322.
Navy Estimates;Mr. Balfour's Appeal to go into Committee, Mar. 22, 972.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Publishing Report;Settling Soldiers on Land, etc., Mar. 25, 1177.
Assizes
Ireland
Commission of Assize;Exclusion of Mayors.
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 19, 419.
Londonderry
Date of Assizes last held at Londonderry, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 25, 1107.
Sending Trivial Cases for Trial, Case King v. S. Hagan, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 25, 1110.
Spring Assizes Act, 1879;Order in Council Presented, Mar. 26, 1266, 1348.
Atkinson, Rt. Hon. J.;Attorney-General for Ireland [Londonderry, N.]
Antrim Assizes;White's, Sir G., Claim for Damage to Property, Mar. 25,1117.
Dublin Castle Authorities;Overriding of the Law, Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 98, 115, 122; Mar. 18, 248.
Factory Prosecutions in Co. Donegal, Mar. 26, 1378.
Halfin, Mr., Case of;Abandoning proceedings against, etc., Mar. 19, 419.
Labourers' Cottages, Occupiers of, and Membership of Public Boards;Resignation of J. Magee, Mar. 15, 101.
Local Government Rules and Orders;Date of lodging Petitions for hearing at Spring Assizes, Mar. 15, 100.
Londonderry Assizes;Sending Trivial Cases for Trial, Mar. 25, 1110.
Mayors, Exclusion of from Commission of Assize, Mar. 19, 419.
Railway Guarantees;Ratepayers deducting half the amount payable, etc, Mar. 22, 873.
Roads, Length Limits;Local Government Order, Mar. 15, 100.
Tallow Conspiracy Case;Number of Jurors ordered to stand aside, Mar. 18, 250.
Ulster Winter Assizes, Mar. 25, 1108.
Westport Petty Sessions Convictions against Scahill, Statements by Mr. Starkie, etc., Mar. 21, 735.
Attorney-General
Sir R. B. Finlay.
Attorney-General for Ireland
Rt. Hon. J. Atkinson.
Australasia
China;Australasian Contingent Services Arnold-Forster, Mr., on, Mar. 18,317.
Imperial Representative Contingent;Pay of the British Army, Comparisons with the Colonials
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 18, 138.
Navy
Flotilla in Australasian Waters, Disappearance of Vote 16 from the Estimates
Debate on the Estimates Mar. 21, 775.
O. Mr. Arnold-Foster, Mar. 22, 977.
Ship "Protector" lent to His Majesty's Government
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 776.
Western Australia;Irish Home Rule Meeting at Perth
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 877.
Austria-Hungary
Financial Condition of Hungary, Paper Presented, Mar. 25, 1062.
Avebury, Lord
Public Libraries Bill, Com., Mar. 25, 1007.
"Avlona"
Loss of;Lighting of Bilbao Harbour
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Visc. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 406.
Avoch Harbour
Repair of, etc.
Qs. Mr. Weir; As. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 15, 86; Mar. 18, 241; Mar. 22, 862; Mar. 26, 1367.
B
Babcock and Wilcox Boiler
Naval Ships;Experiments by the Admiralty
Arnold-Forster's, Mr., Statement, Mar. 18, 331.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 770; Mar. 22. 987.
Bagot, Capt. J. F. [Westmoreland, Kendal]
Yeomanry
Disbandment of Regiments below required Strength, Mar. 26, 1351.
Training, etc., Mar. 26, 1351.
Bailieborough Union
Ambulance, Payment for Horsing;Action of Local Government Board
Q. Mr. S. Young; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1114.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. A. J.;First Lord of the Treasury [Manchester, E.]
Agricultural Land Rating Act;Renewal, Mar. 26, 1385.
Army
Estimates;Debate on Motion that the Speaker leave the Chair, Mar. 15, 151, 152.
Reform and Reorganization Proposals;Opportunity for Discussion, Mar. 15, 186.
Balloting for Motions on Tuesdays, etc.;Private Members' Rights, Mar. 21, 742.
Bimetallism;International Conference proposed, Mar. 26, 1385.
Business of the House, Course of Business, Mar. 15, 106; Mar. 22, 881; Mar. 25, 1124.
China
British Ships in Chinese Waters;Russia's Attempt to exclude, etc., Mar. 18, 227.
Yang-tsze Valley
British Influence, Mar. 18, 227.
Reforms, Introduction of, Mar. 21, 707.
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 15, 104; Mar. 18, 256.
Coaling Stations, Garrisoning;Handing over to the Admiralty, etc., Mar. 25, 1134, 1135.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1432.
Easter Recess, Shortening, proposed, Mar. 26, 1384.
Finland;British Consular Agents, Filling vacant appointments, Mar. 18, 226.
Ireland
Agriculture Department, Vice-President;Seat in Parliament, Mar. 15. 102.
Board of Works, Chairmanship;Filling Vacant Appointment, Mar. 18, 252; Mar. 21, 740.
Financial Relations between Great Britain and Ireland, Mar. 21, 740.
Land Purchase in Co. Wexford, Mar. 21, 739.
University Education;Royal Commission, Mar. 25, 1123, 1124.
King's Accession;Announcement to the Pope, Mar. 21. 741.
Land Tax Commissioners' Names Bill;Introduction proposed, Mar. 26, 1385.
Ministerial Statements in the House of Lords;Communicating to the House of Commons, Mar. 21, 705; Mar. 22, 878, 885, 886, 888, 894, 900, 904.
Parliamentary Elections;Return, Mar. 15, 105.
Poet Laureateship;Abolition proposed, Mar. 26, 1385.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1234.
Questions to Ministers;Printing and circulating Replies among Members, etc., Mar. 15, 105.
Roman Catholicism;King's Declaration against, Mar. 18, 255.
Appointment of Committee, Mar. 21, 741.
Coronation Oath, Referring to Committee, Mar. 19, 421.
Sittings of the House, Saturday Sitting;Business of Supply, Mar. 22, 923, 925, 926, 927, 928.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Publishing Report;Compulsory Confiscation of Boer Lands Contradiction, Mar. 25, 1176.
South African Hospitals Commission;Payments to Commissioners, Mar. 19, 307.
Speeches in Parliament;Proposed Time Limit, Mar. 22, 881.
Supply
Length of Discussion on Votes;Appeals to the Committee, Mar. 19, 449, 490, 508, 509.
Navy Estimates Discussion
Appeal to the Committee to take Vote A, Mar. 23, 1011.
Appeal to the House to go into Committee, Mar. 22, 968, 969, 972.
General Discussion on Vote A, Continuing Discussion on Vote 1, Mar. 23, 1026, 1029, 1030, 1032.
Procedure
Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, Mar. 18, 258, 259, 260, 265, 284, 286, 289, 290, 293, 295; Mar. 19, 428; Mar. 25, 1160.
Committee, Proposed;Allocation of time, etc., Mar. 21, 742; Mar. 26, 1386.
South African Hospitals Commission Report, Discussion, etc., Mar. 19, 517, 518.
Zanzibar and Pemba, Slavery in;Number of Slaves freed 1898&#x2013;1900, etc., Mar. 18, 220.
Balfour, Rt. Hon. G. W.;President of the Board of Trade [Leeds, Central]
Buckland Fish Collection;Removal from South Kensington Museum, Mar. 25, 1102.
Factories, Removal of British Factories to United States.ete.;Return, Mar. 21,712.
German made Brushes, Importation of, Mar. 15, 78
Grain options, Gambling in, Mar. 26,1362.
Great Eastern Railway Goods Rates;Preferential Rates for Foreign Produce, Mar. 22, 854, 855.
Irish Questions
Armagh to Kingscourt Railway;Sale of Rights to Great Northern Railway Company, Mar. 21, 711.
Grand Canal;Tonnage Rate,Mar. 26, 1383.
Great Northern Railway Company;Strabane Merchants' Complaint, Mar. 23, 993.
Killarney Railway Rates;Complaints, Mar. 15, 102.
Lights Board;Allowance for Refreshments, Mar. 21, 738.
Local Government (Ireland) Act Administration;Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials Dispute, etc., Mar. 26, 1429.
Maiden Rocks, Larne;Light and Buoys, Mar. 21, 738.
Trade, Board of;Irish Department proposed, Mar. 22, 873.
Lights and Lighthouses, Irish and Scotch Boards;Reconstitution Proposed, Mar. 15, 80.
London, Tilbury, and Southend Railway;Overcrowding in Carriages, Mar. 26, 1361
Metropolitan Railway;Ventilation, Mar. 26, 1363.
Patents
Brussels Conference;Papers relating to, Mar. 22, 854.
Patent Acts;Committee's Report, Mar. 22, 854.
Peterhead and Holyhead Harbours;Grants, Mar. 25, 1102.
Pontefract Locomotive Explosion, Mar. 15, 79.
Railway Byelaws;New Code, etc., Mar. 15, 78.
Scotch Questions
Dunkeld Railway Facilities, Mar. 26, 1362.
Highland Railways;Mixed Trains, Mar. 21, 710.
Light Railways in Highland Crofting Counties, Mar. 21, 711; Mar. 26, 1361.
Mallaig Railway;Delay in opening, Mar. 22, 855.
Sheffield File Trade with Russia, Mar. 21, 712.
Trade, Board of;Constitution of, Mar. 15, 79.
Wheat Averages, in Mar. 1900 and 1901, etc., Mar. 25, 1102.
Balfour of Burleigh, Lord;Secretary for Scotland
Prisons (Scotland) Bill, 2R., Mar. 19, 366.
Private Bill Legislation (Scotland) Act;Fixing Places for Local Inquiries, Mar. 21, 637.
Public Libraries Bill, Com., Mar. 25,1064, 1065.
Balloting for Motions
Private Members' Eights;Balloting on Tuesdays
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 741.
Ballybofey, Donegal
Sub-Postmastership, Appointment;Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 23, 994.
Bankruptcy
Extradition Treaty with United States;Extending to Offences against Bankruptcy Laws
Qs. Mr. Taylor, Mr. Schwann; A. Visc. Cranborne, Mar. 21, 708.
Bansha Graveyard
Holding Inquiry at Bansha instead of Tipperary, Proposed
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 871.
Banteer
Valuation of Trader's Premises
Qs. Mr. Flynn, Mr. Field; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 420.
Bantry
White Estate, Sale of
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 375.
Barra, Island of
Crofters and Cottars;Purchase of Land from Lady Gordon Cathcart, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1368.
Barracks
(see Names of Barracks).
Bartley, Mr. G. C. T. [Islington, N.]
Careless, Mr., Post Office Sorter;Dismissal, etc., Mar. 15, 84.
Coaling Stations, Garrisoning Question, Mar. 25, 1136.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons; which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 893.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 619.
Savings Hanks and Friendly Society Deficiencies, Mar. 25, 1200.
Shoeburyness;Medical Arrangements for Army Officers, Mar. 19, 401.
South African War;Gifts for the Troops, Delay in Forwarding, Mar. 21, 698.
Standing Orders relating to Training Scheme, Amendments to, Mar. 15, 47.
Supply Procedure;Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18 299.
Bayley, Mr. T. [Derbyshire, Chesterfield]
Ashanti Rising, Causes of the Rising;Military Expedition Policy, etc., Mar. 19, 438.
Rhodesia;Importation of Natives, Disturbances at Salisbury, etc., Mar. 15, 70.
Slavery in Zanzibar and Temba;Number of Slaves freed, etc., Mar. 18, 225.
Beach, Rt. Hon. Sir M. Hicks;Chancellor of the Exchequer (Bristol, W.)
Army and Navy Works Expenditure, Mar. 26, 1360.
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1497.
Brewers' Licences;Returns, Proposed Changes, Mar. 25, 1101.
China
Anti-Foreign Rising;Cost of Operations, Mar. 15, 74.
Cable Communication;Shanghai and Taku Cable, Mar. 18, 228.
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 15, 103.
Coinage, New Coinage;Royal Titles, Mar. 18, 229.
Cornwall and York's, Duke and Duchess, Visit to the Colonies;Authority incurring Expenditure, Mar. 25, 1207.
Dublin Castle Authorities;Overriding of the Law, Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 127.
Income Tax and the South African War;Proposed Exemption of Officers, Mar. 26, 1360.
Iron and Steel Trade;Proposed Import Duty on Steel, Mar. 25. 1100.
Queen Victoria's Funeral;Expenses, Accommodation for Members to view, etc., Mar. 25, 1207.
Savings Banks and Friendly Society Deficiences, Mar. 25, 1208.
Unclaimed Dividends, Amount of, etc., Mar. 18, 229.
Ways and Means;Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill Resolution, Mar. 23, 1059.
Beatty, H.
Case of;Soldiers' Pensions
Q. Mr. Clancy; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 66.
Bedford, Duke of
Army Officers, Instruction for, Mar. 19, 381.
Beer Bill
c. 2R. Mar. 27, 1441.
Beer Bill
Debate on Second Heading (Commons), Mar. 27, 1441.
Administration of Provisions of Bill, Difficulty of, 1452, 1492, 1496
Analysis of Beer
Analyses by London County Council and Somerset House, 1458, 1462.
Difficulty of detecting Malt adjuncts, etc., 1452, 1490, 1496, 1500.
Barley;Effect of the Bill on English and Foreign Barley, 1446, 1449, 1455, 1461, 1485, 1489, 1493.
Beer, Definition of;Chemical changes effected in brewing, etc., 1480.
Hop Substitutes, Prohibition, 1444, 1474.
Manchester Arsenical poisoning Epidemic, 1446, 1447, 1457, 1482, 1491, 1494, 1498.
Sugar, Use in brewing, 1442, 1447, 1458, 1462, 1466, 1501.
Petitions, Mar. 19, 391; Mar. 20, 557; Mar. 21, 692; Mar. 22, 844; Mar. 23, 989; Mar. 25, 1080; Mar. 26, 1346; Mar. 27, 1437.
Belfast
Pauper Graveyard;Area, Sanitary Condition, etc.
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 89.
Valuations;Return
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 737.
Belgium
Anglo-Belgian Treaties, 1831, 1839 and 1870;Repeal, etc.
Q. Mr. Stevenson; A. Visc. Cranborne, Mar. 21, 707.
Belhaven and Stenton, Lord
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Mar. 26,1282.
Bell, Mr. R. [Derby]
Bradford Anti-Vaccinationists;Arrest of W. Mottershead, Mar. 18, 231.
Pontefract Locomotive Explosion, Mar. 15, 79.
Belleville Boilers
(see Navy;Boilers).
Belper, Lord
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 651.
Benefices
Lord Chancellor's Patronage;Case of Rev. A. N. Vowler
Q. Earl of Mount Edgcumbe; A. Earl of Halsbury. Mar. 19, 388.
Bennett, Convict
Letter to the Press
Q. Mr. Allhusen; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 19, 408.
Berwickshire County Town Bill
l. Com.* Mar. 19, 369.
3R* Mar. 21, 667.
c. 1R.* Mar. 22, 882.
Petition, Mar. 27, 1437.
Bethlem Hospital Bill
l. 2R.* Mar. 21, 634.
Bilbao Harbour
Lighting of;IiOssof Steamship "Avlona"
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Visc. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 406.
Bills
Titles of Bills;Provisions which are not authorised by Order of Leave, Phraseology of the "Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill"
Os. Mr. J. Lowther, Mr. Speaker, Mar. 20, 565, 567.
Bimetallism
International Conference, proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1385.
"Birmingham Daily Post"
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents
Qs. Mr. W. Redmond, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 15, 103.
Birr
Labourers' Cottages;Rejection of applications, etc.
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 88.
Black, Mr. A. W. [Banffshire]
King's Title in Scotland, Mar. 18, 240.
Navy
Increasing the Personnel of the Navy;Recruiting, Scheme of Territorialising, Mar. 22, 941.
Nationality of Personnel;Return, Mar. 26, 1356.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Position of, Mar. 21, 750.
South African War
Despatches since Nov. 15, Mar. 25, 1088.
Peace Negotiations with Gen. Botha, Mar. 26, 1350.
Blake, Mr. E. [Longford, S.]
Army;Reform and Reorganisation Scheme, Insufficient Discussion, Mar. 15, 184.
Dublin Castle Authorities' Overriding of the Law;Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 121.
Sittings of the House;Saturday Sitting, Business of Supply, Mar. 22, 927.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes and putting as Lump Sum from the Chair, Mar. 18,260.
Blakesley Street
Board School Scheme;Rehousing Question Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 25, 1104.
Board of Trade
(see Trade).
Board of Works, Ireland
(see Ireland),
Boilers
(see Navy).
Boland, Mr. [Kerry, S.]
China;Tientsin, Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 15, 72.
Derriquin Castle Shooting Party, Mar. 21, 726.
National Library, Ireland;Number of Assistant Librarians, etc., Mar. 26, 1373, 1374.
Sneem Pier;Goods Store, Election of, Mar. 21, 723.
Bolster, Dr
see Shillelagh Union.
Bolton
Post Office Employees' Grievances
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 236.
Bombay
Native Publications;Charge of Sedition against Mr. Malabari
Debate (Lords), Mar. 23, 834.
Bon&#x00E2; Fide Travellers and the Drink Question
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, see that title.
Borax
Prohibiting use of, as Food Preservative;Dr. Thorpe's Evidence, etc.
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 719.
Borneo;British North Borneo
Gaya Bay;Establishment of Naval Station, proposed.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 70.
Boscawen, Mr. S. [Kent, Tunbridge]
Militia
Officers' Rank, Mar. 18, 222.
Training of Battalions not Embodied, Mar. 18, 222.
Bowles, Mr. T. G [Lynn Regis]
Careless, Mr., Post Office Sorter;Dismissal, Mar. 15, 85.
Boy Sailors Scheme
Royal Naval Reserve;Number of Boys enrolled, Refunding Light Dues, etc.
Q. Mr. C. M'Arthur; A. Mr. Han-bury, Mar. 19, 409.
Boyd
Shot by Boers, see South African War;Shooting of British Subjects, etc.
Boyle, Mr. J. [Donegal, W.]
Administration of Ireland;Sympathetic Policy of the Chief Secretary, etc., Mar. 25, 1245, 1246.
Donegal
Fish Curing Stations, Mar. 25, 1109.
Sub-Land Commission;Date of next Sitting, Mar. 22, 864.
Gweebarra Bridge, Repair of, Mar. 25, 1111.
Stranorlar District;Labourers' Cottages, Provisional Order, Mar. 22, 867.
Bradford
Anti-vacciuationists;Arrest of W. Mottershead
Q. Mr. Bell; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18 231.
Braye, Lord
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Committee of both Houses, Mar. 19, 374.
Bread
Mean Price of 41b. Loaf in Mar. 1900, 1901 Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr, G. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1101.
Brewers' Licences
Returns, Proposed Changes;Brewers who use Malt and those who use Substitutes, etc.
Q. Mr. Jeffreys; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 25, 1101.
Bridewell Hospital Bill
l. 2R.* Mar. 21, 634.
Bristol Corporation (Docks and Railways, etc.) Bill
Board of Trade Report Ordered, Mar. 26, 1344;Presented, Mar. 27, 1438.
"Britannia," H.M.S.
Influenza Outbreak;Removing to other Moorings, etc., proposed
Q. Mr. E. Wason; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 67.
British Central Africa Rifles
(see Africa, Central).
British Guiana
Annual Report Presented, Mar. 18, 200, 219.
British South Africa Company
Accounts for 1899, 1900, and Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure, Laying on the Table
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 696.
British Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company Bill
c. Bill Withdrawn, Mar. 19, 389.
Broad Bay
Trawling in;Lightkeepers at Tuimpan Lighthouse Reporting Trawlers, Remuneration, etc. Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 860.
Broadhurst, Mr. H. [Leicester]
Ashanti Rising, Military Operations, etc.,
Mar. 19, 446.
Somaliland;Expedition against the Mad Mullah, etc., Mar. 19, 504.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Publishing Report;Settling Soldiers on the Land, etc., Mar. 25, 1179.
Brodrick, Rt. Hon St. John; Secretary of State for War [Surrey, Guildford]
Army Estimates;Opportunity for discussing, Mar. 31, 826.
Colvile, Gen., Case of
Roberts', Lord, Despatch;Date of Reception at War Office, etc., Mar. 15, 61.
Telegram sent by Chief of Staff on May 24, Mar. is, 221.
Guns;German Guns, Purchase of, Defects, etc., Mar. 15, 63.
India;Commander-in-Chief, Appointment of Sir P. Palmer, Mar. 25, 1091.
Military Man&#x0153;uvres Act, 1897, Amendment Bill, Mar. 25, 1093.
Militia
Gordon Highlanders;Number of men embodied, etc., Mar. 22, 851.
Training of Battalions not embodied, Mar. 18,222.
Reserve, Increase in, Mar. 26, 1355.
Shoeburyness, Medical Arrangements, for Officers, Mar. 19, 401.
South African War
Boer Prisoners;Settlements in Canada and Australia proposed, Mar. 25. 1088.
Colonial Contingents;Cost of sending out Contingents, Mar. 21, 827.
Despatches since Nov. 15, Mar. 25, 1088.
Helvetia surrender;Allegation of Cowardice against Officer in Command, Mar. 18, 220.
Hospitals Commission
Attack on by Mr. Burdett-Coutts, etc., Mar. 19, 538.
Committee of Experts, proposed, Mar. 22, 848.
Invalided Soldiers returning home;Warm Clothing, Mar. 19, 398.
Ladysmith, Siege of, etc.
Correspondence, Mar. 15, 62.
Responsibility for concentration of Stores, Mar. 21, 697.
Lindley Surrender
Names of Persons who raised White Flag, Mar. 26, 1349.
Responsibility of Gen. Colvile, etc., Mar. 25, 1084.
Mafeking, Siege of;Theft of Government Foodstuffs, Mar. 23, 992.
Paardeberg Battle;Gen. Colvile's Report, Mar. 15,61.
Pay;Difference between Pay of Regulars and Yeomanry, etc., Mar. 21 826.
Peace Negotiations with Gen. Botha, Mar. 23, 992; Mar. 25, 1085, 1086; Mar. 26, 1350.
Pensions for Widows and Orphans of Soldiers;Government Scheme, Mar. 19, 398; Mar. 21, 697.
Shooting of British subjects by Order of Com. Delarey, alleged, Mar. 18, 220; Mar. 25, 1083.
Taaibosch, Train Wrecking at, Mar. 22, 847; Mar. 25, 1083.
Volunteers;Drill arrangements at
Dep&#x00F4;ts, Mar. 25, 1088.
Yeomanry
Fife and Forfar Yeomanry;Date of Return, etc., Mar. 15, 63.
Number of Officers and Men sent to South Africa, etc., Mar. 26, 1351.
Staff Reorganisation, Mar. 26, 1354.
Volunteers' Camps;Publishing Arrangements, Mar. 18, 224.
Woolwich Military Academy;Cadets wearing Shamrock on St. Patrick's Day, Mar. 26, 1353.
Yeomanry
Disbandment of Regiments below required strength, Mar. 26, 1352.
Training;Conditions, Mar. 15, 62.
Brookfleld, Col. A M. [Sussex, Rye]
Army
Military Man&#x0153;uvres Act, 1897, Amendment Bill, Mar. 25, 1093.
Reform and Reorganisation;Government Proposals, Mar. 15, 166.
Under-age Recruits;Case of G. Over, Mar. 21, 700.
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1473.
Brown, Mr. M.
Director-General of Customs in Korea;Dismissal
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Vise. Cranborne, 25, 1100.
Brunner, Sir J. T. [Cheshire, Northwich] Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 50.
Supply Procedure;Proposed Committee, Mar. 21, 742.
Transvaal Concessions;Supply of Water and Gas to Pretoria, Mar. 19, 472.
Wilmington Park School;County Council Scholarships, Mar. 21, 713.
Brushes
German-made Brushes, Importation of;Total value in 1900, etc.
Q. Mr. Langley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 78.
Brussels
Conference on Patents, etc.;Papers relating to, laying on the table
Q. Mr. Stuart-Wortley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 854.
Bryce, Rt. Hon. J. [Aberdeen, S.]
University Education, Ireland;Royal Commission, Mar. 25, 1123.
Buckland Fish Collection
Removal from South Kensington Museum Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1102.
Bullets
Mark IV. Ammunition;Breaking up Bullets, etc.
Qs. Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. Weir; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 67; Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19, 401; Qs. Mr. Weir, Mr. K. Hardie; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 699; Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. Weir; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 22, 849; Q. Mr. J. O'Donnell; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1354.
Bunagee Pier
Erection of;Site, Cost, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1372.
Burdett-Coutts, Mr. W. L. A. B. [Westminster]
South African War
Hospitals Commission Report;Partial and Imperfect Inquiry alleged, Mar. 19, 517, 539, 540.
Invalided Soldiers returning home;Warm Clothing, Mar. 19, 398.
Burial Grounds
Ireland;Bansha Graveyard, Holding Inquiry at Bansha instead of Tipperary, proposed
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 871.
(see also Cemeteries).
Burial Grounds (Loans) (Scotland) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 15, 129.
Burial Places (Exemption from Rates) (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, Mar. 20, 557.
Bums, Mr. J. [Battersea]
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1291.
Somaliland;Expedition against the Mad Mullah, Mar. 19, 504.
Business of the House
Course of Business
Statements (Mr. A. J. Balfour). Mar. 15, 106; Mar. 22, 881; Mar. 25, 1124.
Finance Business;Supply, see that title.
Buxton, Mr. S. [Tower Hamlets, Poplar]
Ashanti Rising;Military Operations, Causes of the Rising, Acts of Treachery alleged against the Governor, etc., Mar. 18, 344, 352 356, 364.
British East Africa Protectorate;Punitive Expedition to Somaliland, Administration by the War Office, etc., Mar. 19, 485.
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 51.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 257, 260, 273.
Eyron, Lord
Took the Oath, Mar. 25, 1061.
C
Cable Communication
China, see that title.
Cutting Cables in War Time;United States Naval War Code
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Vise. Cranbome, Mar. 26, 1358.
Cahir
Post Office;Providing suitable Premises Q. Mr. Cullman; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1122.
Caine, Mr. W. S. [Cornwall, Camborne]
Africa, West;Labour Laws, Return, Mar. 15, 71.
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 49.
India
Crops;Winter Crops in Bombay and Madras, Mar. 15, 75.
Famine;Provision for Orphans, Mar. 15, 76.
Land Revenue in Surat District, Mar. 15, 76.
Queen Victoria, Memorial to;Amount
Subscribed, Mar. 15, 75.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Mar. 25, 1171.
Standing Orders relating to Tramway Schemes, Amendments to, Mar. 15, 47.
Caldwell, Mr. J. [Lanark, Mid]
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, Objections to title,etc., Mar. 27, 1441.
Cambrian Railways Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 26, 1291.
Campbell, Mr. J. [Armagh, S.]
Antrim Assizes;Sir G. White's Claims for Damages to Property, Mar. 25, 1117.
Dromard Petty Sessions;District Inspector Clayton, Number of Attendances, etc., Mar. 21, 728, 729; Mar. 22, 872.
Financial Relations between Great Britain and Ireland, Mar. 21, 739.
India;Commander-in-Chief, Appointment of Sir P. Palmer, Mar. 25, 1091.
King's Accession;Announcement to the Pope, Mar. 21, 741.
Lough Neagh Drainage Works, Mar. 21, 732.
Lurgan Disturbances, Mar. 22, 872.
Mafeking, Siege of;Theft of Government
Foodstuffs, Mar. 23, 992.
Plague
Capetown, Mar. 22, 849.
Southampton;Reported Case, etc., Mar. 23, 993.
Campbell-Bannerman, Rt. Hon. Sir H.
[Stirling Burghs]
Ministerial Statements in the House of Lords;Communicating to the House of Commons, Mar. 21, 705; Mar. 22, 882.
Sittings of the House, Saturday Sitting;Business of Supply, Mar. 23, 926.
South African War;Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals, Mar 21, 694.
Supply Procedure
Proposed Committee, Mar. 21, 743.
Consolidating Votes and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 19, 430.
Camperdown, Earl of
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 656.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Com. of both Houses, Mar. 19, 381; Mar. 21, 672.
Canada
Horses, Purchase of, for South African War;Establishing Remount Dep&#x00F4;t, etc. Qs. Mr. G. Parkes, Mr. Malcolm, Mr. Macdona; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19, 399.
Strathcona's Horse, see that title.
Canals Protection Act
Extension to Ireland, proposed
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wynd-
ham, Mar. 22, 870.
Canterbury, Archbishop of
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2ft., Mar. 21, 657.
Cape Colony
Plague at Cape Town
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. J.
Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 849.
Number of Cases and Deaths;Weekly Returns Q. Sir W. Foster; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1086.
Cape Field Artillery Volunteers
South African War;Arrangements for Relief Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1350.
Careless, Mr.
Post Office Sorter, Dismissal of;Refusal to Prosecute, etc.
Qs. Mr. Bartley, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 84,
Carlile, Mr. W. W. [Bucks, N.]
Yeomanry Training;Conditions, Mar. 15, 62.
Carlow District
Lunatic Asylum;Rate-in-Aid
Q. Mr. Hammond; A. Mr. Wynd-ham, Mar. 21, 729.
Carrickmacross
Workhouse Dietary;Action of Local Government Board
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21. 728.
Carvill, Mr. P. G. H. [Newry]
Salmon Fishing;Poisoning Spawning Grounds, Mar. 15, 94.
Castlebar
Lunatic Asylum;Delay in Payment of Rate-in-Aid
Q. Dr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 729.
Cathcart's, Lady Gordon, Estate
Purchase of Land for Crofters and Cottars Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. H. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1368.
Cattle
Tuberculosis, see that title
Cawley, Mr. F. [Lanes, Prestwich]
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Mar. 25, 1192.
Cecil, Lord H. [Greenwich]
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of presenting Supplementary Estimates, consolidating and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 281.
Cemeteries
Omagh District Cemetery;Delay in Payment of Loan, Closing Drumragh Burial Ground, etc.
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 90.
Chairman of Committees
Rt. Hon. J. W. Lowther.
Chamberlain, Mr. Austen;Financial Secretary to the Treasury [Worcestershire, E.]
Civil Service
Compulsory Retirement;Age limit, Mar. 15, 85.
Ireland;Monitor Candidates, Age Allowances, Mar. 18, 236.
Unestablished Service counting towards Pension, Mar. 21, 723.
Coinage, New Coinage;Discontinuance of Crown Pieces, Mar 19, 413.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill;Mr. Caldwell's Objections, etc., Mar 27, 1441.
Cornwall, Duchy of;Coal Royalties in Somerset, Mar. 22, 860.
Customs Officers, Assistants of Customs;Promotion of Outdoor Officers, Salaries, Mar. 15, 83.
Diplomatic and Consular Services;Increase in Expenditure, Mar. 35, 1211, 1212.
Diplomatic Telegrams;Increase in Expenditure, Mar. 25, 1212.
Distinguished Service Order, Cost of, etc., Mar. 25, 1214.
Irish Questions
Ballybofey, Sub-postmastership, Mar. 23, 994.
Cahir Post Office;Providing suitable Premises, Mar. 25, 1122.
Down, Co.;Postal Arrangements, Mar. 22, 874, 875.
Dublin
Post Office Revision, Mar. 18, 254.
Sorting Office;Defalcations, Mar. 22, 876.
Enniskillen Post Office;Date of Opening New Post Office, Mar. 22, 877.
Eyeries Postal Arrangements, Mar. 26, 1381.
Glencolumbkille Ex-sub-postmaster;Date of Dismissal, etc., Mar. 25, 1121, 1122.
Trish Language;Delivery of Letters addressed in Irish, Mar. 25, 1119, 1120.
Irish Speaking Postmasters, Appointment of, etc., Mar. 18, 253.
Knockbrack Sub-Post-office;Reopening, Mar. 25, 1119.
Land Commission, Clerk's Pay, Mar. 21, 722.
Madden, T., Retired Postman at Portumna, Mar. 22, 875, 876.
Queen's Stores, Dublin;Sale to Shipping Company, Mar. 18, 249.
Schull Letter Carrier;Wages, Mar. 26, 1381.
Valuations, Belfast;Returns, Mar. 21, 737.
Keighley Sunday Letter Deliveries, Mar. 25, 1105.
Lead Poisoning;Government Contracts, Use of Leadless Glaze, Mar. 26, 1365.
Parcels Postage Rates to South Africa, Mar. 18, 225.
"Parliamentary Debates";Delay in Publication, Mar. 18, 239.
Post Office Employees
Bolton;Grievances, Mar. 18, 236.
Careless, Mr.;Dismissal, etc., Mar. 15, 84.
Manchester;Promotions, Telegraphist refunding Back Pay, etc., Mar. 21, 722.
Radwinter and Hempstead Postal Arrangements, Mar. 18, 237.
Scotch Questions
Kessock Ferry;Conveyance of Mails as Passengers' Luggage, Mar. 18, 235.
Stornoway Mails;New steamer service between Stornoway and Mallaig, Mar. 18, 238.
Sheffield;Mr. Graves's Private Postal Collections Agitation, Mar. 26, 1366.
Stationery Office Vote Mar. 25, 1212,1217.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting' Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 269, 270, 277.
Telephone Service
Shields;Charges between North and South Shields, Mar. 22, 859.
Telephone Districts;Transferring from one Exchange Area to another, Mar. 21, 721.
Pontypool Telephone Exchange Area Transferred to Abergavenny District, Mar. 18, 238.
Treasury Chest Fund, Mar. 25, 1213.
Twine Contracts for the Post Office, Mar. 15, 81.
Vale of Clwyd Postal Service, Mar. 15, 82.
Wireless Telegraphy;Adopting by British Steamship Companies, etc., Mar. 18, 235.
Chamberlain, Rt. Hon. J.;Secretary of State for the Colonies [Birmingham, W.]
Administration of the Colonial Office;"Three Wars" Indictment, Mar. 19, 441.
Africa West
Gold Mining Companies;Tax on Gross Receipts, Mar. 26, 1357.
Labour Laws, Return, Mar. 15, 72.
Ashanti Rising, Military Operations, etc., Mar. 18, 339, 340, 341, 348; Mar. 19, 433.
Destruction of towns, etc., Mar. 26, 1357.
Australia, Western;Irish Home Rule resolution, Mar. 22, 877.
British South Africa Company Accounts, etc.;Laying on the Table, Mar. 21, 696.
Cape Colony;Plague at Cape Town, Mar. 22, 849; Mar. 25, 1087.
Colonial Customs Tariffs;Reciprocity Treatment for British and Irish Goods, Mar. 25, 1096.
Colonial Office Telegrams, Number of Telegrams, etc., Mar. 25, 1230.
Rhodesia, Native labour;Importation of Natives, Disturbances at Salisbury, Beira, etc., Mar. 15, 71.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Mar. 22, 849.
South African Settlement;Repatriation of South African Refugees, Mar. 25, 1087.
South African War
Boer Prisoners;Case of Mrs. Hertzog, Mar. 21, 696.
Peace Negotiations, Mar. 19, 397; Mar. 21, 695; Mar. 22, 848; Mar. 23, 991, 992; Mar. 25, 1085.
Assistance to Boer Farmers after the War;Withdrawing words "by Loan" proposed, Mar. 25, 1086.
Relief to Sufferers after the War, Mar. 15, 60.
Yeomanry Settlers;Assisting Passages of Wives and Families, Mar. 18, 219.
Transvaal
Forster, Mr. D.;Civil Appointment, Mar. 21, 695.
Land Settlement Commission;Settling Soldiers on the Land, etc., Mar. 25, 1165, 1171, 1174.
Transvaal Concessions Commission
Markham's, Mr., Attack on Mr. Love-day, Mar. 19, 459, 461.
Publication of Report of Commission, Mar. 19, 471.
Transvaal and Orange River Colonies, Financial Condition;Sir D. Barbour's Report, etc., Mar. 26, 1350.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
Lord James of Hereford.
Chancellor of the Exchequer
Rt. Hon. Sir M. Hicks-Beach.
Channing, Mr. F. A. [Northampton, E.]
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 50.
South African War, Case of Mrs. Hertzog, Mar. 21, 696.
Chaplains
see titles Army and Navy.
Chaplin, Rt. Hon. H. [Lincolnshire, Sleaford]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1488.
Vaccination;Local Government Board Circular, Mar. 15, 81.
Charing Cross, Hammersmith and District Electric Railway Bill
l. 2R.* Mar. 15, 1.
Charities
Ireland;Vote for, Mar. 25, 1129.
Charity Commission
Report Presented, Mar. 21,694; Mar. 22, 833.
Chief Secretary for Ireland]
Rt. Hon. G. Wyndhain.
Children
Drunkenness among children in Great Britain and Ireland;Number of children arrested, 1899, 1900
Qs. Mr. Flower; As. Mr. Ritchie, Mr. A. G. Murray, Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 407.
Education, see that title.
Infanticide;Death Sentences
Q. Sir B. Gordon; A. Mr. J. Collings, Mar. 21, 715.
Pauper Children, see that title.
China
Anti-Foreign Rising
Anglo-German Agreement;Application of Agreement to Manchuria
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 405; Qs. Mr. W. Redmond, Mr. J. O'Kelly; As. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 33, 853; Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 35, 1097.
Anglo-Russian Dispute at Tientsin, see sub-heading Tientsin.
Australasian Contingent Services
Arnold-Forster, Mr., on, Mar. 18, 317.
British Forces
Naval Contingent;First Lord's Memorandum Arnold-Forster's, Mr., Statement, Mar. 18, 315.
Pechili, Gulf of;Russia's Attempts to exclude British Fleet, etc.
Q. Sir E. Ashmead-Bartlett; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 226.
Total Cost of Operations
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 1,5, 74.
Looting
Chief Ordnance Officer's Statement
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 26, 1358.
Gasalee's, Gen., Despatches, Laying on the Table Q. Mr. E. Robertson; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 35, 1099.
Manchuria;Russo-Chinese Agreement
Anglo-German Agreement, see that sub-heading.
Assurances given by Count Lams-dorff, etc.
Q. Sir E. Ashmead-Bartlett; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 26, 706.
British Trade, Effect on
Q. Mr. Harwood; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 26, 1357.
Chinese Government refusing to sign Agreement, etc
Q. Sir E. Ashmead-Bartlett; A. Vise Cranborne, Mar 26, 1357.
Japan;Threat to establish Protectorate in Fo-kien, alleged
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 405.
Tientsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute
Qs. Mr. J. Walton, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 18, 227; Qs. Mr. J. Walton, Sir E. Ashmead-Bartlett; As. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 19, 404; Q. Mr. K. Hardie; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1264.
Barrow. Gen Action of, etc.
Qs. Mr. Boland, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 72; Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 21, 703.
British Troops;Reinforcements
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 21, 704.
Negotiations with Russia
Qs. Mr. Lloyd-George; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 21, 703, 705.
Russian Concession;Date of signing, etc. Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 25, 1097.
Statement (Marquess of Lansdowne), Mar. 21, 639.
Withholding information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords
Motion for Adjournment of the House (Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman). Mar.22, 882.
Cable Communication between Shanghai and Taku;Arrangement with H. M. Government, Nationality of Stall, etc.
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Sir M. H. Beach. Mar. 18, 228.
Railway Concession, Canton to Hankau;Transference to Belgian Syndicate alleged
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 405.
Yang-tsze Valley, Decline in British Influence Q. Sir E. Ashmead-Bartlett; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 227.
Yang-tsze Viceroys;Introduction of Re-forms Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 707.
China Manufacture
Lead Poisoning, see that title.
Church
Discipline;Petitions for alteration of the Law, Mar. 20, 558; Mar. 35, 1080; Mar. 26, 1346.
Lord Chancellor's Patronage;Case of the Rev. A. N. Vowler
Q. Earl of Mount Edgcumbe, Mar. 19, 388.
Churchill, Mr. W. [Oldham]
Ashanti Rising;Military Expedition, etc., Mar. 19, 441.
Civil List Committee
Publication of Confidential Documents
Forbidding Entrance to the House, of Reporters of Newspaper Q. Mr. T. Egerton; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 15, 104.
Prosecution of The "Times" and "Birmingham Daily Post," etc., proposed
Qs. Mr. E. Robertson, Mr. W. Redmond, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Sir R. Finlay, Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 16, 102.
"Times"
Representative;Proposed Exclusion from the Lobby Qs. Mr. Roche, Mr. Young; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Sir R. Finlay, Mar. 18, 256.
Special Report from Committee, Mar. 15, 59.
Civil Service
Compulsory Retirement;Assimilation of Age Limit, proposed
Q. Sir G. Newnes; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 85.
Ireland;Monitor Canditates;Age Allowances
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. IS, 236.
Superannuation
Appointment without Certificate;Treasury Minute Presented, Mar. 19, 306, 395.
Qualifications of Junior Inspector in the. Agricultural Department, Ireland;Treasury Minute Resented, Mar. 33, 990; Mar. 25, 1062.
Superannuation and Retired Allowances, Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Unestablished Service, Counting towards Pension Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 723.
Civil Service Estimates
see Supply.
Civil Surgeons
see titles South African War and Army;Medical Department.
Clancy, Mr. J. J. [Dublin Co., N.]
Beatty, H.;Pension Question, Mar. 15, 66.
Board of Works;New Chairman, Mar. 21, 740.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1408, 1422.
Dublin Castle Authorities, Over-riding of the Law;Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 125.
Local Government (Ireland) Act Administration;Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials Dispute, etc., Mar. 26, 1408, 1422.
Local Government Rules and Orders;Return, Mar. 15, 87.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 908.
Portadown Disturbances, Mar. IS, 251; Mar. 21, 736; Mar. 25, 1246, 1257, 1258; Mar. 26, 1377.
Clare
Mullough Police Malpractices, see Mul-lough.
Clayton, District Inspector
(see Dromard Petty Sessions).
Clones
Railway Gates;Obstruction to Traffic,. Proposed Construction of Bridge
Q. Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. Long, Mar. IS, 252.
Coal
Duchy of Cornwall Royalties in Somerset;Amount received from Lessees of Farrington Gurney Colliery, etc.
Q. Mr. Strachey; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain Mar. 32, 859.
Supply for the Public Service;Increase in Price of Coal, Method of Purchasing, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 35,. 1223.
Coal Mines (Employment) Bill
Petitions, Mar. 20, 558; Mar. 22, 844; Mar. 23, 989; Mar. 25, 1080; Mar. 26, 1346; Mar. 27, 1437.
Coaling Stations
Garrisoning;handing over to the Admiralty
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 774; Mar. 25, 1133.
First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold Pointer's Statement, Mar. 18, 325.
Coast Guard Service
Vote for, Mar. 22, 075; Mar. 23, 995.
"Cobra"
Turbine Machinery Tests
Q. Sir T. Wrightson; A. Mr Arnold-Forster, Mar. 22, 852.
Cochrane, Mr. T. H. [Ayrshire, N.]
Kilmarnock Sheriff Court;S. Reid, Absent Juryman, Mar. 19, 413.
Navy;Debate in Com. on the Estimates, Mar. 23, 1040.
Boilers Question, 1041.
Engineers, Position of, 1042.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Position of, 1040.
Submarine Boats, 1043.
Cogan, Mr. D. J. [Wicklow, E.]
Greystones Pier and Harbour;Defective Works, Comity Surveyor's Report, etc., Mar. 15, 96.
Coghill, Mr. D. H. [Stoke-upon-Trent]
Agriculture Department, Ireland;Vice-President, Seat in Parliament, Mar. 15. 102.
Lead Poisoning, New Rules proposed;Advice of Professors Thorpe and Oliver, Mar. 15, 77.
Cohen, Mr. B. L. [Islington, E.]
Savings Banks and Friendly Society Deficiencies, Mar. 25, 1201.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Mar. 25, 1170.
Coinage
India, see that title;Currency.
New Coinage
Crown Pieces, Discontinuance of
Q. Mr. Holland; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 19, 412.
Royal Titles;Retention of "Defender of the Faith"
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 18, 229.
Collings, Rt. Hon. J.;Under Secretary for the Home Office [Birmingham, Bordesley]
Courts of Petty Sessions;Summary Jurisdiction, Mar. 22, 856.
Death Sentences for Infanticide, Mar. 21, 715.
Justices and the Oath of Allegiance, Mar. 21, 715.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 609.
Colomb, Sir J. [Great Yarmouth]
Army Reform and Reorganisation;Government Proposals, Mar. 15, 160, 80.
Defence of the Empire, Expenditure on, by the Army and Navy, etc., Mar. 21, 783.
Navy
Administration of the Admiralty;Overworked Staff, no time to initiate Reforms, etc., Mar. 21, 785.
Engineers, Position of, Mar. 25, 1138.
Pay;In and out System of Full and Half-pay, Mar. 25, 1144.
"Sybille," H.M.S. Wreck of;Officers and Men on Duty, Mar. 21, 702.
Training
Officers, Mar. 21, 789.
Personnel, Mar. 21, 784.
Wastage;Executive and Engineering Branches, Mar. 25, 1139.
Submarine Cables, Cutting in War Time, Mar. 26, 1358.
Yeomanry;Objections to term "Imperial," Mar. 15, 160.
Colonial Office
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. J. Chamberlain.
Parliamentary Secretary;Earl of Onslow.
Chamberlain's, Mr., Administration;Responsibility for Three Wars
Lloyd-George, Mr., on, Mar. 19, 441;Mr. Chamberlain's Reply, 441.
Salaries and Expenses of Department, Vote for, Mar. 25, 1227.
Colonial Reports Presented
Annual Series, Mar. 18, 200, 219.
Colonial Services
Vote for. Mar. 18, 337; Mar. 19, 428.
Colonies
Customs Tariff;Reciprocity Treatment from Mother Country
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. J, Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1096.
Defence of the Empire;Co-operation of the Colonies, Contributions towards Expenditure, etc. O. Mr. Lee, Mar. 15, 147.
Debate on the Army Estimates, Mar.15, 173.
Debate on the Navy Estimates, Mar. 21, 782, 783, 809; Mar. 22, 949, 979; Mar. 25, 1132, 1145.
Loans Act 1899;Return Presented, Mar. 22, 846.
For Particular Colony, see Names of Colonies.
Colvile, Gen. Sir H. E.
Roberts', Lord, Despatch, Date of Reception at War Office;Court of Inquiry into Lindley Disaster, Laying Finding on the Table
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 61.
Telegram sent by Chief of Staff on May 24;Delay in reaching Gen. Colvile, etc. Q. Mr. Emmott; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 18, 220.
War Office Letter of Dec. 16;Responsibility of Gen. Colvile for Lindley Surrender
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1084.
Commander-in-Chief
see titles Army and War Office;Administration.
Commander-in-Chief in India
Palmer, Sir P., Appointment of, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1091.
Commission of Assize
see Assize.
Commissions of Inquiry
Withholding Reports from the House
Debate in Committee of Supply, Mar.25, 1167.
(For particular Commissions, see their Names.)
Commissions of the Peace
see Magistrates and Justices of the Peace.
"Commitments"
Military Responsibilities Abroad
O. Mr. E. Robertson, Mar. 15, 173.
Committals
Ireland, Number of Persons Committed for Trial in 1900;Return Presented, Mar. 23, 991; Mar. 25, 1062.
Committees
Commons
Select Committee;Nomination of Members, Mar. 25, 1125.
House of Lords
Clerk of Outdoor Committees;Appointment of Mr. E. H. Alderson Motion (Earl of Halsbury), Mar. 15, 3.
Select Committees;Members Appointed to form Select Committee for Consideration of Certain Bills, Mar. 15, 2.
Compensation for Damage to Crops Bill
Petition, Mar. 26, 1346.
Compulsory Military Service
see Army.
Condon, Mr. T. J. [Tipperary, E.]
Railway Guarantees;Ratepayers deducting half the Amount payable, etc.,Mar. 22, 873.
Congested Districts
Ireland
Return
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 89.
Sligo County;Number of Electoral Divisions Scheduled, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1113.
Scotland;Crofters and Cottars, Migration from Congested Districts
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Scott Dickson. Mar. 25, 1100.
Congested Districts Board, Ireland
Galway Co., Operations in
Q. Mr. O'Malley; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 247.
"Granuaille";Annual Repairs, Entrusting to Londonderry Firm
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar. 25, 1109.
Congested Districts Board, Scotland
Lewis, Island of, Congestion in;Petition from Stornoway Parish Council, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray
Mar. 15, 87.
Parliamentary Grant, Balance in hand;Amount expended on Crofters' Holdings
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray Mar. 19, 414.
Report;Date of Issue
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 415.
Road Construction, see Roads.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 25, 1263.
2R., Mar. 20, 1387.
Com, Mar. 27, 1441.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill
Caldwell's, Mr., objection to title, etc., Mar. 27, 1440.
Ways and Means Resolution, Mar. 23, 1059.
Consols
Fluctuation in Price;Savings Bank and Friendly Society Deficiencies
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1199.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
District Inspectors, Term of Office;Retention of Inspector Wallace
Q. Mr. C. O'Kelly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 246.
Down, Co.;Promotion of Constables, Number of Roman Catholics promoted, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 418.
Moville Police;Appointment of Roman Catholic Sergeant, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1108.
Mullough;Police Malpractices, see Mullough.
Portadown Disturbance see that title.
Queen Victoria's Funeral, Day of General Mourning;Publicans compelled to close, see Ireland.
Return
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1118.
Return Ordered, Mar. 26, 1349.
Summer Uniforms
Q. Mr. J. Hutton; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1377.
Consular Service
see Diplomatic and Consular Service.
Contagious Diseases, Animals
Foot and Mouth Disease, see that title.
Contempt of Court
Westport Petty Sessions;Number of Cases, Case of Mrs. Salmon, etc.
Q. Mr J. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1372.
Cooper's Hill College
Petitions of Officers of Public Works Department;Return Ordered, Mar. 15, 59.
Cork Lunatic Asylum
Criminal Lunatics, Cost of Maintenance
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1379.
Rate-in-Aid;Delay in Payment
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1380.
Corn
Wheat Averages;Gazette price of British Wheat in March, 1900 and 1901, mean price of 4 lb. loaf
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. C. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1101.
Cornwall, Duchy of
Royalties on Coal in Somerset;Amount received from lessees of Farrington Gurney Colliery, etc.
Q. Mr. Strachey; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 859.
Cornwall and York, Duke and Duchess
Visit to the Colonies
Expenses, Sanction of the House of Commons
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1204.
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Coronation Oath
Referring to Committee on King's Declaration against Roman Catholicism
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 19, 421.
Corrie Grant, Mr. [Warwickshire, Rugby]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1495.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situation in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons, which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 21, 705; Mar. 22, 878, 880, 886.
South African War;Peace Negotiations, Mar. 23, 992; Mar. 25, 1086.
Cottage Homes Bill, 1899
Recommendations of Select Committee;Legislation Proposed
Q. Mr. J. Hutton; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 718.
County Courts (Ireland) Bill
l. 2R., Mar. 15, 45.
County Justices' Clerks Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 22, 929.
County Officials, Ireland
see Ireland.
Covered Vehicles
Dangers of;Proposed Regulations
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 232.
Cranborne, Visc.;Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs [Rochester]
Africa, East;British Protectorate Finance;Increase in Supplementary Vote, Military Operations, Slave Question, etc., Mar. 19, 482.
China
Anti-Foreign Rising
Anglo-German Agreement and Russian Occupation of Manchuria, Mar. 19, 405; Mar. 22, 853; Mar. 25, 1098.
Manchuria;Russo-Chinese Agreement, Mar. 19, 405; Mar. 21, 706; Mar. 26, 1357, 1358.
Tientsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 18, 227; Mar. 25, 1097.
Railway Concession, Canton to Hankau;Transfer to Belgian Syndicate, alleged, Mar. 19, 406.
Foreign Office Telegrams, Increase in Cost, Mar. 25, 1228, 1229.
Korea, Director-General of Customs;Dismissal of Mr. Brown, Mar. 25, 1100.
Macedonia;Turkish Excesses at Uscub, alleged, Mar. 19, 406.
Slavery in Zanzibar and Pemba, Mar. 25, 1099, 1100.
Somaliland
Anglo-Abyssinian Expedition against the Mad Mullah, Mar. 19, 500.
Punitive Expedition, Employment of British Central Africa Regiment, etc., Mar. 19, 499, 504, 505, 506.
Spain;Bilbao Harbour, Lighting of;Loss of "Avlona," Mar. 19, 407.
Submarine Cables, Cutting in War Time, Mar. 26, 1359.
Treaties between Great Britain and Continental Powers, Mar. 21, 707.
United States, Extradition Treaty with, Mar. 21, 708.
Crean, Mr. E. [Cork, S.E.]
Ministerial Statements in the House of Lords;Communicating to the House of Commons, Mar. 22, 880.
Naval Construction in Ireland, Mar. 15, 70.
South African Hospitals Commission, Partial and Imperfect Inquiry, etc., Mar. 19, 547.
Cremation Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 19, 422.
Crofters and Cottars
Barra, Island of;Purchase of Land from Lady Gordon Cathcart, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1368.
Congested Districts, Migration from
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. S. Dickson, Mar. 25, 1106.
Holdings in the Island of Lewis, Purchase of Land
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 414.
Reports of Crofters' Commission;Free Distribution to Sheriff Clerks' Offices
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1368.
Small Holdings;Enabling Parish Councils to acquire Land compulsorily, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1366.
Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act (1886) Amendment Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 15, 129.
Cromarty Firth
Suitability for Naval Station;Fortihcation proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1095.
Crombie, Mr. J. W. [Kincardineshire]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 567.
Cromer Water Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 25, 1079.
Crown Pieces
Discontinuing Coinage proposed
Q. Mr. Holland; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 19, 412.
Cuby's Bank, Gibraltar
Failure of;Regimental Losses, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; J. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1092.
Cullinan, Mr. J. [Tipperary, S.]
Bansha Graveyard;Inquiry, Mar. 22, 871.
Cahir Post Office;Providing Suitable, Premises, Mar. 25, 1122.
Local Government (Ireland) Act;Administration, Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials Dispute, etc., Mar. 26, 1402.
O'Brien, Mr. K.;Removal of, from Commission of the Peace, Mar. 25, 1114, 1115, 1116.
Supply;Insufficient Detail, Mar. 25,1224.
Currency
India, see that title.
Customs House
Dublin;Examinations for Candidates for Assistant Surveyorships
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1117.
Customs Officers
Assistants of Customs;Promotion of Outdoor Officers, Salaries, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Gordon; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 83.
Customs Tariffs
Colonies;Reciprocity Treatment for the Mother Country
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1096.
D
Dairy Industry
Ireland;Preservatives, Pasteurisation, etc., Legislation proposed
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 88.
Daly, Mr. J. [Monaghan, S.]
Armagh to Kingscourt Railway;Sale of Rights to Great Northern Railway Company, Mar. 21. 711.
Assistant County Surveyors;Local Government Board raising Salaries, Mar. 21, 726.
Down, Co.;Postal Arrangements, Mar. 22, 874.
Horse Breeding in Ireland;Board of Agriculture, Mar. 22, 866.
Navy Estimates;Expenditure on Shipbuilding in Ireland, etc., Mar. 22, 969.
Poor Law Medical Officers;Holidays, Action of Local Government Board, Mar. 21, 727.
Poor Law Superannuation Bill;Charge on Local Rates, Mar. 19, 418.
Somaliland Expedition, Mar. 19, 509.
South African War, Pay of Colonial Troops, etc., Mar. 21, 818.
Transvaal Commissions;Settling Soldiers in South Africa, etc., Mar. 19, 473.
Wexford Local Government Appeal;Local Government Circular, etc., Mar. 22, 864.
Workhouses
Amalgamation, Mar. 22, 865.
Appointment of Trained Nurses, Mar. 21, 727; Mar. 22, 866, 867.
Carrickmacross Workhouse Dietary;Action of Local Government Board, Mar. 21, 728.
Dalziel, Mr. J. H. [Kirkcaldy Burghs]
South African Hospitals Commission
Evidence on Oath, Sanitary Precautions, etc., Mar. 19, 532.
Payments to Commissioners, Mar. 19, 397.
Dangerous Trades
Lead Poisoning, see that title.
Davies, Mr. A. [Carmarthen Boroughs]
Colonial Customs Tariff;Reciprocity Treatment, Mar. 25, 1096.
South African War;Relief to Sufferers after the War, Mar. 15, 60.
Deaf and Dumb Children
Education of, see Education.
Death Sentence
Infanticide;Alteration of Law proposed
Q. Sir B. Gurdon; A. Mr. J. Collings, Mar. 21, 715.
"Defender of the Faith"
Retention of Title on new Coinage
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 18, 229.
Defence of the Empire
Co-operation of the Colonies;Contributions towards Expenditure, etc.
O. Mr. A. Lee, Mar. 15, 147.
Debate on the Army Estimates, Mar. 15, 173.
Debate on the Navy Estimates, Mar. 21, 782, 783, 809; Mar. 22, 949, 979; Mar. 25, 1132, 1145.
Delany, Mr. W. [Queen's Co., Ossory]
Irish Political Prisoners;Amnesty proposed, Mar. 18, 231.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Appointment of Joint Committee, Mar. 18, 255.
Demise of the Crown Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 25, 1126.
Dental Registration Fund
Receipts and Expenditure;Returns Presented, Mar. 26, 1266, 1348.
Denton Explosion
Inspector's Report Presented, Mar. 25, 1062, 1081.
Derriquin Castle
Shooting Party;Firing from Public Road, etc.
Q. Mr. Roland; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 726.
Devonshire, Duke of;Lord President of the Council.
Parliamentary Papers, Delay in Delivery to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 843.
South African War;Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War, Mar. 18, 205.
Wolseley's, Lord, Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 37, 41.
Dewar, Mr. J. A. [Inverness]
Barra, Island of;Purchase of Land for Crofters and Cottars, Mar. 26, 1368.
Crofters and Cottars;Commission Reports, Mar. 26, 1368.
King's Title in Scotland, Mar. 18, 240.
Dewar, Mr. T. R. [Tower Hamlets, St. George's]
Blakesley Street Board School Scheme;Re-housing, Mar. 25, 1104.
South African Yeomanry Settlers;Assisting Passages of Wives and Families, Mar. 18, 219.
Vehicular Traffic in the Metropolis;Covered Vans, Mar. 18, 232.
Dickson, Mr. C. S.;Solicitor General for Scotland [Glasgow, Bridgeton]
Congested Districts;Migration of Crofters and Cottars, Mar. 25, 1106, 1107.
Education;Attendance at Schools, Half-timers, etc., Mar. 25, 1107.
Light Railways in Highlands Crofting Counties, Mar 25, 1106.
Dietary in Workhouses
see Workhouses.
Dilke, Rt. Hon. Sir C. W. [Gloucester, Forest of Dean]
Africa, East;British Protectorate Finance, Increase in Supplementary Vote, Military Operations, Slave Question, etc., Mar. 19, 479, 490.
Army
Commander-in-Chief, Duties of;Training of the Army, Modification of Order in Council of 1895, etc., Mar. 15, 131.
Compulsory Service;Mr. Brodrick's Statement, Mar. 15, 138.
Pay;Comparison with Pay of the Colonials, Mar. 15, 138.
Reforms and Reorganisation;Government Proposals, Mar. 15, 129.
Reinforcements for South Africa;Sending untrained Men into the Field, Mar. 15, 140.
Separate Army System for India, Mar. 15, 134.
Short Service Army to fill the Reserves for War, Mar. 15, 133.
Army and Navy Works;Expenditure, Mar. 26, 1359.
China
Cable Communication;Shanghai and Taku Cable, Mar. 18, 228.
Tientsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 25, 1097.
Easter Recess, Shortening proposed, Mar.26, 1384.
Militia Ballot;Prime Minister's Opinion, etc., Mar. 15, 137.
Navy
Alliance with Military Power and the alternative, Mar. 22, 964.
Boilers;Belleville Type, Training of Stokers Question, Mar. 22, 966.
Expenditure;Speeches made by the Opposition against large Expenditure, Mar. 22, 961.
Fleets;Return, Mar. 15, 68.
New Powder, New Middle-sized Guns, etc., Mar. 22, 968.
Shipbuilding
Delays in Construction, Mar. 22, 965.
New Construction, Expenditure on, etc., Mar. 22, 963.
Standard for Shipbuilding, Mar. 22, 963.
Treasury Control, Mar. 22, 963.
South African War;Lindley Surrender, Names of Persons who raised White Flag, Mar. 26, 1349.
Supply Procedure
Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 278.
Navy Estimates;Procedure, Mar. 22, 928.
Dillon, Mr. J. [Mayo, E.]
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1424.
Local Government (Ireland) Act;Administration, Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials Dispute, etc., Mar. 26, 1424.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, etc., Mar. 21, 747.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Publishing Report;Settling Soldiers on the Land, etc., Mar. 25, 1182.
University Education, Ireland;Royal Commission, Mar. 25, 1124.
Dillon Estate
Sale by Congested Districts Board;Reservation of Sporting Rights
Q. Mr. Hayden; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 97.
Dingwall
Barrack Accommodation, Inadequacy of etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 702.
Diplomatic and Consular Buildings
Vote for, Mar. 25, 1221.
Diplomatic and Consular Services
Expenditure;Increase in
Debate in Committee of Supply, Mar. 25, 1209, 1223.
Finland;British Consular Agents, Filling vacant Appointments
Q. Mr. D. Morgan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 226.
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Disabled Soldiers
Pensions for
Debate (Lords), Mar. 25, 1072.
Diseases of Animals
Inspectors of Nuisances and Medical Officers of Health Candidates;Knowledge of the Diseases of Animals
Qs. Mr. Field; As. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 720.
Diseases of Animals Acts
Board of Agriculture Annual Report Presented, Mar. 26, 1265, 1348.
Distinguished Service Order
Additional Sum for the Lord Chamberlain's Department
Debate in Committee of Supply, Mar. 25, 1210, 1214.
Distribution of Parliamentary Papers
see Parliamentary Papers.
District Councils
Rural District Councils, see that title.
Dixon-Hartland, Sir F. D. [Middlesex, Uxbridge]
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1303.
Dockyard Labourers
Inadequate Pay
O. Mr. Morton, Mar. 23, 1039.
Donegal
Factory Prosecutions;Costs of the Crown, Case of Squire v. Sweeney, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 26, 1378.
Fisheries
Erection of Boatslip at Araheera, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 873.
Fish Curing Stations, Number erected by Congested Districts Board, etc.
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1109.
Salmon Nets;Congested Districts Board Loans, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1368.
Gweebarra Bridge, Repair of;Resolution of Donegal County Council, etc.
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1111.
Sub-Land Commission;Date of next Sitting
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 864.
Donelan, Capt. A. J. C. [Cork, East]
Board of Works, Ireland;Loans, Mar. 26, 1376.
O'Brien, Mr. K.;Removal of from Commission of the Peace, Mar. 25, 1116.
Woolwich Military Academy;Cadets wearing Shamrock on St. Patrick's Day, Mar. 26, 1353, 45
Doogan, Mr. P. C. [Tyrone, E.]
Croat Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 48.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Estimates, so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1239.
Stewartstown Riot;Disorderly proceedings in Dungannon, Mar. 15, 95; Mar. 25, 1259.
Dorking Gas Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 20, 557.
Douglas, Rt. Hon. A. Akers;First Commissioner of Works [Kent, St. Augustine's]
Coal for the Public Service;Contracts, etc., Mar. 25, 1223.
Diplomatic and Consular Buildings, Expenditure on, etc., Mar. 25, 1223.
Edinburgh Inland Revenue Buildings;Construction of New Buildings, Mar. 18, 234.
Hyde Park Gates;Allowing Cabs to pass through, etc., Mar. 18, 234.
King Charles I., Statue of;Decoration prohibited on Jan. 30, 1901, Mar. 22, 858.
Piccadilly, Widening, Mar. 18, 234.
Down, Co.
Constabulary;Promotion of Constables, Number of Roman Catholics promoted, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 418.
Postal Arrangements;English and Scotch Letters, Delays, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 874.
Drainage Works, Ireland
Lough Neagh;Failure of Drainage Works, Giving Controlling Power to County Councils, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 732.
Drift Surveys
see Surveys.
Dromard
Petty Sessions;District Inspector Clayton, Number of Attendances, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 728; Mar. 22, 872.
Drugs
Irish Local Government Contracts;Irish Firms compelled to offer Discount, etc., alleged
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1112.
Drunkenness
Child Drunkenness in Great Britain and Ireland;Number of Children arrested, etc.
Qs. Mr. Flower; As. Mr. Ritchie, Mr. A. G. Murray, Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 407.
Dublin
Custom House Examinations;Assistant Surveyors
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1117.
National Library;Number of Assistant Librarians and Attendants, Want of Accommodation, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1373.
Ph&#x0153;nix Park, Use of, for Military Purposes;Extending Area, etc.
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 90.
Post Office Revision;Female Supervising Staff, Increase of Pay, Proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 254.
Queen's Stores, North Wall;Sale to Shipping Company
Q. Mr P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 249.
Sorting Office;Defalcations, Holding Controller responsible, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 876.
Dublin Castle Authorities
see Ireland;Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan.
Dublin Society, Royal
Live Stock Breeding, Improvement of;Transferring Grant to Department of Agriculture proposed
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 243.
Duffy, Mr. W. J. [Galway, S.]
Arran Islands;Fever Outbreak, Mar. 25, 1113.
Finnigan; P., and Constable Muldowney;Proposed remission of Sentence, Mar. 18, 242.
Horse Breeding in Ireland for the Army, Mar. 15, 194.
Dunkeld Railway
Insufficient Facilities
Q. Mr. Stroyan; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1361.
Duration of Speeches in Parliament
Twenty Minutes Limit
Qs. Mr. Renwick, Maj. Rasch; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 22, 880.
E
Earthenware Manufacture
Lead Poisoning, see that title.
East India
see India.
Easter Recess
Shortening Recess, proposed
Qs. Mr. S. Smith, Sir C. Dilke; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1384.
Ebrington Barracks
Enlarging;Delay in Completion
Q. Marquess of Hamilton; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 701.
Eckstein, Messrs.
Markham's, Mr., Attack on Mr. Loveday, Mar. 19, 453.
Edenderry
Portadown Disturbances, see that title.
Edinburgh
Inland Revenue Buildings;Delay in Construction, Supply of Suitable Stone, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Douglas, Mar. 18, 234.
Education
President;Dirke of Devonshire.
Vice-President;Rt. Hon. Sir J. E. Gorst.
Deaf and Dumb Children, Schools for;Roman Catholic Children
Q. Lord E. Talbot; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 21, 714.
Evening Continuation Schools;Returns, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Hobhouse; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 21, 713.
Heckmond wike School of Science;Charging Fees, etc.
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 25, 1102.
Higher Elementary Schools, Number of Applications for Recognition
Q. Dr. Macnamara; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 19, 411.
Higher Grade and Evening Continuation Schools;Petitions for Alteration of Law, Mar. 15, 57; Mar. 18, 217; Mar. 19, 391; Mar. 20, 558; Mar. 21, 692; Mar. 22, 844; Mar. 23, 989; Mar. 25, 1080; Mar. 26, 1346; Mar. 27, 1437.
Irish Questions
Irish Language in National Schools;Extra Subject Fees, etc
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1118.
National School Teachers, see that title.
Roxboro' Road School;Premises let to Dean Greg, etc.
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 91.
London School Board;School Accommodation
Q. Mr. Talbot; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 26, 1365.
Revised Regulations;Certificates of Age, Proficiency and School Attendance, Presented, Mar. 25, 1061, 1082.
Scotch Questions
Attendance at School;Additional Attendances, Half Timers, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Mr. Scott Dickson, Mar. 25, 1107.
Greenock, see that title.
Navigation Classes in Evening Schools;Number of Scholars
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 21, 723.
Stepney Schools, see that title.
Teachers
Disablement Allowance;Number of Teachers receiving in 1900, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 22, 857.
Superannuation Act;Deferred Annuity Funds, Accounts Presented, Mar. 22, 834, 846.
Tower Hamlets Board Schools, Blakesley Street Scheme;Re-housing Question, etc.
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 25, 1104.
Training Colleges, see that title.
Winnington Park School;County Council Scholarships, Extending Age Limit of Children, proposed
Q. Sir J. Brunner; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 21, 713.
Edwards, Mr. F. [Radnor]
Poet Lanreateship;Abolition proposed, Mar. 26, 1385.
Egerton, Mr. A. de Tatton [Cheshire, Knutsford]
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 15, 104.
Elections
see, Parliamentary Elections.
Electric Lighting Acts 1882 and 1888
Board of Trade (Special) Report Presented, Mar. 25, 1062, 1082.
Electric Lighting (London) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 26, 1387.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 1) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 22, 844.
Memorandum stating Nature of Proposals Contained in Bill, Ordered, Mar. 26, 1345;Presented, Mar. 27, 1439.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 2) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 26, 1342.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 3) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 26, 1343.
Electric Lighting Provisional Orders (No. 4) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 26, 1343.
Elementary Education
see Education.
Ellis, Mr. J. E. [Nottingham, Rushcliffe]
British South African Company's Accounts, etc.;Laying on the Table, Mar. 21, 696.
Macedonia;Turkish Excesses at Uscub, alleged, Mar. 19, 406.
Maidstone Election Petition;Notes of Evidence, Mar. 21, 725.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 903.
South African War;Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals, Mar. 23, 991.
Supply Procedure;Consolidating Votes and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 19, 429.
Transvaal Concessions Commission and Land Settlement Commission;Soldier Settlers for South Africa, etc., Mar. 22, 849; Mar. 25, 1162, 1165, 1167.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 682.
Emigration
Irish Statistics, Presented, Mar. 22, 846; Mar. 25, 1061.
Report on the Emigrants' Information Office, Presented, Mar. 18, 200, 219.
Emmott, Mr. A. [Oldham]
Colvile, Gen., Case of;Telegram sent by Chief of Staff on May 24, Mar. 18, 220.
Engineers
Coopers' Hill College, see that title.
Naval Engineers, see Navy.
Enniskillen
Land Commission;Date of next Sitting
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 251.
Post Office;Date of opening new Building, etc.
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 876.
Esher, Visc.
Sat first in Parliament after the Death of his Father, Mar. 25, 1061.
Esmonde, Sir T. G. [Wexford, North]
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1388.
County Officials' Salaries, Increase in, Dispute;Opportunity for Discussion, Mar. 18, 244; Mar. 19, 421.
Local Government (Ireland) Act Administration;Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials, etc., Mar 26, 1388.
Ormond, Electoral Divisions;Transfer to Borrisokane Union, Mar. 18, 244.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, etc., Mar. 21, 747.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in Form of presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18, 280.
University Education;Debate on Roman Catholic University for Ireland, Mar. 25, 1124.
Wexford, Land purchase in, Mar. 19, 420; Mar. 21, 739.
Essex
Radwinter and Hempstead Postal arrangements;Second Delivery proposed
Q. Mr. A. Wodehouse; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 237.
Evening Continuation Schools
Returns, Incompleteness of, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Hobhouse; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 21, 713.
see also title Education;Higher Grade and Evening Continuation Schools, etc.
"Excellent," H.M.S.
Roman Catholic Chaplains
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 745.
Explosions
Felt Hat Works, Denton;Inspector's Report Presented, Mar. 25, 1062, 1081.
Extradition Treaty
see United States.
Eyeries
Postal Arrangements;Sunday Delivery proposed
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1381.
F
Factories and Workshops
Amendment Bill;Date of Introduction
Q. Mr. Tennant; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 15, 77.
Prosecutions, Ireland;Costs of the Crown, case of Squire v. Sweeney, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 26, 1378.
United States, Removal of British Factories to;Return
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 712.
Famine
(see India).
Fardell, Sir T. G. [Paddington, S.]
Militia
Disembodiment, Mar. 25, 1090.
Officers' Promotion, Mar. 25, 1091.
Farquharson, Dr. R. [Aberdeenshire, W.]
Gordon Highlanders;Militia Battalion, Mar. 22, 850.
Farrell, Mr. J. P. [Longford, N.]
Africa;British East Africa Protectorate, Murder of Mr. Jenner, etc., Mar. 19, 489.
Ashanti Rising;Military Operations, Mar. 19, 448.
Balloting for Motions on Tuesdays, etc.;Private Members' Rights, Mar. 21, 741.
Down Co. Constabulary;Number of Roman Catholics promoted, etc., Mar. 19, 418.
Kilkelly, Mr.;Resident Magistrate at Longford, Mar. 22, 871.
Longford Canal Harbour;Dangerous State of, etc., Mar. 22, 870, 871.
Mullingar District Lunatic Asylum;Increased Expenditure, Mar. 21, 733.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, Mar. 21, 761.
South African War
Imperial Yeomanry Reinforcements, etc., Mar. 21, 819.
Pay;Dissatisfaction among Private Soldiers, etc., Mar. 21, 820.
Workhouses
Amalgamation, Mar. 22, 865.
Nurses;Appointment of Trained Nurses, Mar. 21, 733; Mar. 22, 867.
Fenwick, Mr. C. [Northumberland, Wansbeck]
Navy;Position of Engineers;Status of Warrant Officers, etc., Mar. 23, 1006.
Fergusson, Rt. Hon. Sir J. [Manchester, N.E.]
Army;Reform and Re-organisation Scheme, Three Army Corps for Service Abroad, etc., Mar. 15, 185.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, Mar. 21, 757
South African War;Shooting of British Subjects by Boers, Mar. 25, 1082.
Supply;Amendment to Votes, Mar. 19, 471.
Fermanagh
Local Government Board, increasing Salaries of Officials;Proposed Inquiry
Qs. Mr. Jordan; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 96; Mar. 18, 250.
Feversham, Earl of
Parliament;Presence of the Sovereign, Suggestions for increasing Accommodation, Mar. 18, 214.
Ffrench, Mr. P. [Wexford, S.]
Land Purchase in Wexford Co., Mar. 21, 739.
Militia Reservists;Liability to Serve an Extra Year, Mar. 18, 221.
Trawling off the Irish Coast;Gunboat Protection, etc., Mar. 23, 1016.
Field, Mr. W. [Dublin, St. Patrick]
Army Estimates, Opportunity for Discussing, Mar. 21, 828.
Bi-metallism;International Conference proposed, Mar. 26, 1385.
Board of Trade
Constitution of, Mar. 15, 79.
Irish Department proposed, Mar. 22, 873; Mar. 25, 1254.
Commission of Inquiry, Cost of, Mar. 25, 1214.
Drift Surveys, Mar. 22, 858; Mar. 25, 1103; Mar. 26, 1365.
Drug Contracts;Irish Local Government Contracts, Mar. 25, 1112, 1113.
Dublin Sorting Ollice;Defalcations, Mar. 22, 870.
Geological Survey, Mar. 25, 1255.
Grain Options, Gambling in, Mar. 26, 1362.
Grand Canal, Ireland;Tonnage Pate, Mar. 26, 1383.
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instructions to Com., Mar. 18, 216.
Great Eastern Railway Company Hates;Preferential Rates for Foreign Produce, Mar. 19, 410.
Harbours round the Irish Coast;Complaints against Railway Pates, etc., Mar. 25, 1255.
Inspectors of Nuisances;Candidates' Knowledge of Diseases of Animals, Mar. 21, 720.
Irish and Scotch Lighthouse Boards;Re-constitution proposed, Mar. 15, 80.
Irish Lights Board;Allowance for Refreshments, Mar. 21, 738.
Maiden Rocks, Larne;Light and Buoys, Mar. 21, 738.
Medical Officers of Health;Diseases of Animals, Requiring Test of Knowledge, Mar. 21, 720.
Navy
Estimates;Opportunity for Discussion, Mar. 22, 969.
Protection of Irish Fisheries;Roman Catholic Chaplains;Naval Expenditure in Ireland, etc., Mar. 23, 1002.
Post Office Vote, Increase in, Mar. 25, 1214.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Estimates, so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1239.
Reformatory and Industrial Schools;Lord Lieutenant's Order, etc., Mar. 25, 1256.
Scotch Private Bill Act Expenses, Mar. 25, 1214.
South African War
Hospitals Commission, Report, etc., Mar. 19, 544.
Meat;Contract with South Africa Cold Storage Company, etc., Mar. 15, 190, 194.
Supply;Closure of Discussion, Mar. 19, 553.
Tuberculosis;Local Government Board Regulations, Unlawful Seizures, etc., Mar. 22, 850, 857.
Valuations
Belfast;Return, Mar. 21, 737.
System of, in Ireland, Mar. 19, 421.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 683.
Fife and Forfar Yeomanry
South African War;Reduction in Strength, Date of Return, etc.
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 62.
Finance
Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom, see that title.
Financial Relations, England and Ireland
Inquiry
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 739.
Naval Expenditure;Expenditure on Shipbuilding in Ireland, see Ireland.
Financial System of the Country
Relationship between the Treasury and the Admiralty, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21 799; Mar. 22, 958, 963.
Finland
British Consular Agents;Filling Vacant Appointments
Q. Mr. D. Morgan; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 226.
Finlay, Sir R. B.;Attorney-General [Inverness Burghs]
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 15, 102.
Demise of the Crown Bill, Introduced, Mar. 25, 1126.
Land Registry;Number of Titles Registered, etc., Mar. 25, 1105.
Maidstone Election Petition;Notes of Evidence, Mar. 21, 725.
Finnigan, Irish Convict
Remission of Sentence proposed
Qs. Mr. Duffy, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 242.
Fire Brigade
Report of the Select Committee;Legislation
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 18, 233.
First Commissioner of Works
Rt. Hon. A. Akers-Douglas.
First Lord of the Admiralty
Earl Selborne.
First Lord of the Treasury
Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour.
Prime Ministership;Associating Office with that of First Lord of the Treasury
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1234.
Fish Culture
Buckland Fish Collection;Removal from South Kensington Museum
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1102.
Fisheries
Donegal, see that title; see also titles Salmon Fisheries, Trawling, etc.
Fishery Cruisers
see Trawling;Gunboats.
Fishery Piers and Harbours
see Piers and Harbours.
Fitzmaurice, Lord E. [Wilts, Cricklade]
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1413, 1418.
Local Government (Ireland) Act Administration;Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials Dispute, etc., Mar. 26, 1413.
Flannery, Sir J. Fortescue [Yorkshire, Shipley]
Coaling Stations;Garrisoning Question, Mar. 25, 1136.
Navy
Armour Plate Supply, Mar. 22, 933.
Boilers question, Mar. 22, 930, 936.
Engineers, Position of, etc., Mar. 22, 935, 940; Mar. 25, 1137.
Estimates;Restriction on Discussion, etc., Mar. 22, 927, 928.
Fleet Reserve, Royal Naval Reserve, etc., Mar. 22, 934, 935.
Shipbuilding
Admiralty Overseers, Mar. 22, 934.
Programme of Construction;
Submarine Boats, etc., Mar. 22, 931.
Flavin, Mr. M. J. [Kerry, N.]
Army;Corn Contracts and Irish Producers, Mar. 15, 193.
Coal for the Public Service Contracts, Mar. 25, 1223.
Foreign Office Telegrams, Increase in Cost, Mar. 25, 1228, 1230.
Questions;Absence of Ministers, Mar. 27, 1441.
Stationery and Printing Contracts, Mar. 25, 1215.
Stewartstown;St. Patrick's Day Meeting, Mar. 15, 95.
Trawling;Employment of Gunboats, Mar. 25, 1123, 1150, 1151.
Flax Cultivation, Ireland
Restrictions as to discharge of Flax Water into Rivers
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1374.
Fleets
Return
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 68.
Flower, Mr. E. F. S. [Bradford, W.]
Child Drunkenness in Great Britain and Ireland, Mar. 19, 407.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 595.
Flynn, Mr. J. C. [Cork, N.]
Horses for the Army, System of Purchase, Prices paid for Forage, etc., Mar. 15, 188.
Local Government (Ireland) Act Administration, Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials Dispute, etc., Mar. 26, 1429.
Navy
Colonial Contributions, Mar. 25, 1145, 1146.
Estimates;General Discussion on First Vote, Mar. 22, 977.
Firemen and Stokers, Belleville Boilers, etc., Mar. 25, 1133.
Increase in Expenditure;Expenditure on Shipbuilding in Ireland, etc., Mar. 23, 1049; Mar. 25, 1144.
Trawling, Protection of Fisheries by Gunboats, etc., Mar. 23, 1049; Mar. 25, 1144.
Official Telegrams, Cost of, etc., Mar. 25, 1230.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1236.
Stewartstown;St. Patrick's Day Meeting, Mar. 15, 95.
Supply Procedure
Alteration in Form of presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18, 301.
Supplementary Estimates for large sums, Mar. 25, 1224.
Valuations at Banteer;Trader's Premises, Mar. 19, 420.
Folkestone Corporation Bill
l. Report,* Mar. 22, 833.
Food Preservatives
Borax, Prohibiting Use of;Dr. Thorpe's Evidence, etc.
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 719.
Foot-and-Mouth Disease
Number of Outbreaks in 1901;Danger arising from Importation of Skins, etc.
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 18, 232.
Stowmarket;Removal of Restrictions
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 19, 409.
Forehoe Guardians
Differences between Guardians and Master of Workhouse;Resignation of Guardians, etc.
Q. Mr. F W. Wilson; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 36, 1353.
Foreign Affairs
Ministerial Statements, see that title.
Foreign Meat
Army Contracts, see Army.
Foreign Office
secretary of State;Marquess of Lansdowne.
Under Secretary;Viscount Cransborne.
British East Africa Protectorate Administration
Debate in Committee of Supply, Mar. 19, 480, 483, 480.
Salaries and Expenses of Department, Vote for, Mar. 25, 1227.
Telegrams, Cost of;Increase in Expenditure.
Debate in Committee of Supply, Mar. 25, 1211, 1212, 1227.
Foreign Produce
Railway Rates, see Railways.
Foreigners' Marriages Bill c. 1R.* Mar. 19, 427.
Forster, Mr. Douglas
Transvaal Appointment
Q. Sir B. Cordon; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 695.
Foster, Sir M. [London University]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1479.
Foster, Sir W. [Derby, Ilkeston]
Land Registry;Number of Titles registered, etc., Mar. 25, 1104.
Plague in Cape Colony;Weekly Returns, Mar. 25, 1086.
South African Hospitals Commission
Partial and Imperfect Inquiry, etc., Mar. 19, 534.
Report, Opportunity for Discussion, Mar. 19, 518.
Foula, Island of
Illegal Trawling oil';Prosecutions
Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 861.
Fowler, Rt. Hon. Sir H. [Wolverhampton, E.]
Supply Procedure;Alteration in Form of presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidation and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 292, 296.
France
Naval Expenditure;Increase in Expenditure
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 778; Mar. 22, 953.
Trade Report Presented, Mar. 21, 636.
Franchise
Inver;Disfranchisement of Householders
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. C. Murray Mar. 21, 725.
Poor haw Medical Relief and the Franchise
Q. Mr. H. J. Wilson; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 717.
French Language
English Army Examinations;Decree concerning French Syntax issued by French Minister of Education
Q. Mr. Pierpoint; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1092.
Friendly Society and Savings Bank Deficiencies
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1199.
Supplementary Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Fruit Cultivation
Experimental Stations for Cultivation of Apples and Pears
Q. Sir J. Rankin; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 22, 855.
Fuller, Mr. J. M. F. [Wilts, Westbury]
Salisbury Plain;Police Arrangements, Mar. 26, 1353.
South African Settlement;Repatriation of South African Refugees, Mar. 25, 1087.
Furness, Sir C. [Hartlepool]
Belleville Boilers, Retention of, in Ships now in Course of Construction, etc., Mar. 19, 403.
G
Galway
Congested Districts Board's Work
Q. Mr. O'Malley; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 247.
Garrison Churches, India
see India;Army.
Gaya Bay
Establishment of Naval Station proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 70.
General Medical Council
Receipts and Expenditure;Returns Presented, Mar. 26, 1266, 1348.
Germany
Brushes, Importation to England;Total Value
Q. Mr. Langley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 78.
Grain Options, Gambling in;Operation of German Law, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1362.
Guns, Purchase of, for British Army;Defects
Q. Mr. Renwick; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 63.
Navy Estimates;Admiral Tirpitz's Proposals
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 22, 964.
Gibbs, Mr. V. [Herts, St. Albans]
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 300.
Gibraltar
Cuby's Bank, Failure of;Regimental Losses, etc.
Q. Mr. Pirie; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1092.
Dock and Harbour Defences;Inquiry
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 774.
Gilhooly, Mr. J. [Cork Co., W.]
Berehaven Harbour Accident;Treatment of Irish Sailors by Officers in Charge of the "Collingwood";Protection of Irish Fisheries, etc., Mar. 23, 1043.
Castletown Postal Service, Mar. 25, 1219.
Cork Lunatic Asylum;Rate-in-aid, Mar. 26, 1380.
Eyeries Postal Arrangements, Mar. 26, 1381.
Lunatic Asylums, Ireland;Cost of Maintenance of Criminal Lunatics, Mar. 26, 1379.
Schull Letter Carrier;Wages, Mar. 26, 1381.
White Estate, Bantry, Date of Sale, Mar. 26, 1375.
Gladstone, Rt. Hon. H. J. [Leeds, W.]
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 269.
Glasgow, Earl of
Private Bill Legislation (Scotland) Act;Fixing places for local inquiries, Mar. 21, 636.
Glasgow and South Western Railway Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 26, 1290.
Glasgow and South Western Railway Bill
Board of Trade Report Ordered, Mar. 26, 1344;Presented, Mar. 27, 1438.
Glencolumbkille
Ex-sub-postmaster, Date of Dismissal;Appointment of Serjeant of Royal Irish Constabulary
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1120.
Goddard, Mr. D. F. [Ipswich]
Vaccination of Pauper Children, Mar. 21. 717.
Golborne Gas Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 18, 216.
Gold Currency, India
see India;Currency.
Gold Mines
Africa, West, see Africa.
Gordon Highlanders
Militia Battalion;Strength of, Disembodiment proposed
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 22, 850.
Gordon, Maj. W. [Tower Hamlets, Stepney]
Stepney Schools;Number of Board and Voluntary Schools in Areas H. L. J. K., Site Scheduled for Board School in Arbour Square, etc., Mar. 19, 411.
Gordon, Mr. J. [Londonderry, S.]
Customs Officers;Out-door Officers promoted to Assistants of Customs, Salaries, Mar. 15, 83.
Gorst, Rt. Hon. Sir J. H.;Vice-President Council for Education [Cambridge University]
Blakesley Street Board Schools Scheme;Rehonsing Question, Mar. 25, 1104.
Deaf and Dumb Children, Schools for;Roman Catholic Children, Mar. 21, 714.
Drift Survey in Ireland, etc., Mar. 22, 858; Mar. 25, 1104; Mar. 26, 1366.
Evening Continuation Schools;Returns, etc., Mar. 21, 713.
Heckmondwike School of Science;Charging Fees, Mar. 25, 1103.
Higher Elementary Schools;Number of Applications for Recognition, Mar. 19, 411.
London School Board;School Accommodation, Mar. 26, 1365.
Stepney Schools;Number of Board and Voluntary Schools in Areas H. L. J. and K., Site Scheduled in Arbour Square, etc., Mar. 19, 411, 412.
Teachers;Disablement Allowances, Mar. 22, 858.
Training Colleges
Committee, Appointment of, Mar. 25, 1103.
Examinations;Qualifications for First Class, Mar. 19, 412.
Winnington Bark School;County Council Scholarships, Mar. 21, 714.
Government Contracts
Earthenware Goods;Use of Leadless Glaze
Qs. Mr. Talbot; As. Lord Stanley, Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1364.
(see also titles Army and Navy).
Government Property
Rates, Vote for, Mar. 25, 1128.
Grain
Gambling in Futures in Grain;Operation of German Law, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1362.
Granby, Marquess of
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Mar. 26, 1272.
Grand Canal, Ireland
Tonnage Rate for Inland Waterway, Boats, etc.,
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour Mar. 26, 1383.
"Granuaille"
Congested Districts Board's Steamer;Annual Repairs, Entrusting to Londonderry Firm, proposed
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1109.
Gravesend Gas Bill
c. Report,* Mar. 27, 1507.
Gray, Mr. E. [West Ham, N.]
London, Tilbury and Southend Railway;Overcrowding Carriages, Mar. 26, 1360.
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1336.
Great Eastern Railway Bill
c. Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 48; Mar. 18, 215.
Great Eastern Railway Company
Rates;Preferential Rates for Foreign Produce
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 19, 410; Q. Maj. Rasch; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 854.
Great Northern Railway Company
Armagh to Kingscourt Railway;Sale of Rights, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 23, 711.
Strabane Merchant's Complaint;Delay in bringing to Trial
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 23, 992.
Greenwich Hospital
Pension for Disabled Soldiers
Debate (Lords), Mar. 25, 1072.
Grenfell, Maj. W. H. [Bucks, Wycombe]
Indian Currency;Silver Coinage, Mar. 26 1359.
Greenock
School Board;Providing Prizes for Denominational Schools out of School Fund
Qs. Mr. J. F. X. O'Brien; As. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 21, 724.; Mar. 22, 862.
Greenwich Hospital
Annual Report on Administration
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Pretyman, Mar. 15, 70
Greystones
Pier and Harbour, Erection of;Defective Works, County Surveyor's Report, etc.
Q. Mr. Cogan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 96.
Groves, Mr. J. G. [Salted, S.]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1501, 1502.
Guinan, Private P.
Application for Increase of Pension
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19, 402.
Gully, Kt. Hon. W. C. [Carlisle]
see Speaker.
Gunboats
Fishery Cruisers, see Trawling.
Guns
see titles Army and Navy.
Gurdon, Sir W. B. [Norfolk, N.]
Death Sentences for Infanticide, Mar. 21, 715.
Somaliland Punitive Expedition, Employment of British Central Africa Regiment, etc., Mar. 19, 497, 504.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 283.
Transvaal;Appointment of Mr. D. Forster, Mar. 21, 695.
Gweebarra Bridge
Repair of
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1111.
H
Habitual Drunkards Bill
Committee Stage
O. Bishop of Winchester, Mar. 18, 201.
Petition, Mar. 26, 1266.
Haldane, Mr. R. B. [Haddington]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 607.
Hall, Mr. Marshall [Lancashire, Southport]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 622.
Halpin, Mr.
Councillor for Clare;Abandoning Proceedings against, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 19, 419.
Halsbury, Lord;Lord Chancellor
Lord Chancellor's Patronage;Case of Rev. A. N. Vowler, Mar. 19, 388.
Public Libraries Bill, 2R., Mar. 18, 213; Com. Mar. 25, 1064.
Reading Clerk and Clerk of Outdoor Committees;Appointment of Mr. E. H. Alderson, Mar. 15, 5.
War Office Administration;Lord Wolseley's indictment of the system introduced in 1895, and Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 44.
Hamilton, Rt. Hon. Lord G.;secretary of State for India [Middlesex, Ealing]
China;Anti-Eoreign Rising
Looting in Pekin, Mar. 25, 1099; Mar. 26, 1358.
Tientsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 15, 72; Mar. 19, 404; Mar. 21, 703, 704.
Crops;Winter Crops in Bombay and Madras, Mar. 15, 75.
Currency
Gold Reserve, Mar. 22, 853.
Silver Coinage, Mar. 26, 1359.
Famine;Provision for Orphans, Mar. 15. 76.
Land Revenue;Surat District, Mar. 15, 76.
Military Outposts in 1898, etc., Mar. 15,74.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 895, 898, 907.
Public Works Department, Officers' Petitions, Return, Mar. 15, 74.
Queen Victoria's Memorial;Amount, subscribed, Mar. 15, 75.
Hamilton, Marquess of [Londonderry]
Ebrington Barracks;Delay in Enlarging, Mar. 21, 701.
Hammond, Mr. J. [Carlow]
Carlow District Lunatic Asylum;Rate-in-aid, Mar. 21, 729.
Hanbury, Rt. Hon. R. W.;President of the Board of Agriculture [Preston]
Boy Sailor Scheme and the Royal Naval Reserve, Mar. 19, 409.
Foot and Mouth Disease
Number of Outbreaks in 1901;Importation of Skins, Mar. 18, 232.
Stowmarket Regulations, Mar. 19, 409.
Great Eastern Railway Company;Preferential Rates for Foreign Produce, Mar. 19, 411.
Horticulture;Experimental Stations proposed, Mar. 22, 855.
Lighthouses;Communication with the shore, Making available for Private Messages, Mar. 19, 410.
Tithe Averages;System of Ascertaining Mar. 21715.
"Hansard"
see "Parliamentary Debates."
Harbours
Naval Expenditure on Anchors and Moorings in connection with New Harbours;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 328.
(see also title Piers and Harbours, and Names of Piers and Harbours.)
Harcourt, Rt. Hon. Sir W. G. V. [Monmouthshire, W.]
Ashanti Rising;Military Operations, etc., Mar. 19, 448.
Beer Bill, 2B., Mar. 27, 1469, 1482, 1493.
Coaling Stations, Garrisoning;Handing over to the Admiralty, Mar. 85, 1134.
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1311.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 887, 896, 901.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 615.
Savings Banks and Friendly Society Deficiencies, Mar. 25, 1200.
South Africa Land Settlement Commission, Withholding Report from the House;Reinforcing British Influence in South Africa, etc., Mar. 25, 1167, 1171.
Supply Procedure;Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 19, 428, 429;Change of Procedure without consulting the House, Mar. 25, 1157, 1160.
Hardie, Mr. Keir [Merthyr Tydvil]
China;Anglo-Russian Dispute at Tientsin, Mar. 25, 1264.
Cornwall and York's, Duke and Duchess, Visit to the Colonies;Expenses, Sanction of the House of Commons, Mar. 25, 1204.
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 51.
Mark IV. Ammunition;Breaking up Bullets, etc., Mar. 21, 699.
Post Office;Twine Contract, Mar. 15, 81.
Queen Victoria
Funeral Procession;Expenses, Members' Stand, etc., Mar. 25, 1205.
Mourning Stationery, Mar. 25, 1204.
Sheffield Post Office;Mr. Graves's Private Postal Collections Agitations, Mar. 26, 1366.
Soldiers' Kits, Mar. 21, 700; Mar. 26, 1354.
South African War;Taaibosch, Boer Atrocity, Mar. 21, 697.
Standing Orders, Amendments to, Relating to Tramway Scheme, Mar. 15, 47.
Supply;Exempting Vote dealing with Funeral of Queen Victoria, Mar. 19 554.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 680.
Hardwicke, Earl of;Under-Secretary of State for India
India
Ancient Monuments, Preservation of;Vandalism at Bijapur, etc., Mar. 19, 386.
Native Publications;Charge of Sedition against Mr. Malabari, Mar. 22, 837, 840, 841.
Scottish Presbyterian Soldiers;Use of Government Churches, Mar. 25, 1068.
Ludgate Hill and Snow Hill Railway Stations, Dangerous condition of, Mar. 21, 670.
Harris, Mr. F. L. [Tynemouth]
Telephone Charges between North and South Shields, Mar. 22, 859.
Harrow
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1270, 1277.
Hartlepools Gas and Water Transfer Bill
c. Report,* Mar. 26, 1346.
Harwood, Mr. G. [Bolton]
China;Manchuria, Russo-Chinese Agreement, Mar. 26, 1357.
Haviland-Burke, Mr. [King's County, Tullamore]
South African War;Taaibosch Train Wreckers, Mar. 22, 847; Mar. 25, 1083.
Havre
Trade Report Presented, Mar. 21, 636.
Hayden, Mr. P. [Roscommon, S.]
Dillon Estate;Sale by Congested Districts Board, Reservation of Sporting Rights, Mar. 15, 97.
Healy, Mr. T. M. [Louth, N.]
Belfast Pauper Graveyard;Overcrowded Condition, etc., Mar. 15, 89.
Civil List Committee;Publication of official Documents Mar. 15, 103.
Dublin Castle Authorities;Overriding of the Law;Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 97, 113, 119.
Local Government Rules and Orders;Return, Mar. 15, 87.
Heath, Mr. J. [Staffordshire, N.W.]
Lead Poisoning;Number of cases in 1899 1900, Return, Mar. 18, 231.
Heckmondwike School of Science
Fees
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 25, 1102.
Heckmondwike Gas Transfer) Bill
c. Report,* Mar. 22, 844.
Helvetia Surrender
see South African War.
Hemphill, Rt. Hon. C. H. [Tyrone, W.]
Dublin Castle Authorities, Overriding of the Law;Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 119.
Hempstead
Postal Arrangements;Second Delivery proposed
Q. Mr. A. Wodehouse; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 237.
Henley, Baron
Representative Peer for Ireland, Mar. 18, 197; Mar. 26, 1265.
Henry Diaper and Company (Delivery Warrants) Bill
l. Report,* Mar. 19, 365.
3R.* Mar. 25, 1061.
c. 1R.* Mar. 26, 1344.
Hereford, Bishop of
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 664.
Hereford House
Vote for Wallace Collection, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Herries, Lord
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Com. of both Houses, Mar. 19. 369, 381; Mar. 21, 672.
Hertzog, Mrs.
Boer Prisoner
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 696.
Higher Elementary Schools
see Education.
Highland Railway Company
Dunkeld Railway Facilities, Insufficiency of, etc.
Q. Mr. Stroyan; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1361.
Mixed Trains
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour Mar. 21, 709.
Highlands and Islands, Scotland
Hospital Accommodation, Difficulty of securing
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray Mar. 15, 86.
Light Railways
Number of Certificates issued for Construction of Railways, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Scott Dickson, Mar. 25, 1106.
Proposed Amendment of Light Railways Act
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 710.
Treasury Grants;Proposed Amendment of Light Railways Act
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1361.
Poultry Breeding;Distributing free Sittings of Eggs in Congested Areas, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 862.
(see also title Crofters and Cotters.)
Hobhouse, Mr. C. E. H. [Bristol, E.]
Evening Continuation Schools;Returns, etc., Mar. 21, 713.
Hobhouse, Mr. H. [Somerset, E.]
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18, 279
Tea, Importation of Inferior Tea;Local Government Board Inspectors, etc., Mar. 21, 716.
Hodson, Sir F.
References to in Debate on the Ashanti Rising and Military Expedition, Mar. 18, 342, 345, 346, 356; Mar. 19, 443
Holyhead Harbour
Government Grants
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. C. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1102
Holland, Mr. W. H. [York, W.R., Rotherham]
London Water (Purchase Bill), 2R., Mar. 26, 1336
New Coinage;Discontinuance of Crown Pieces, Mar. 19, 412
Home Industries Bill
c. 1R.,* Mar. 26, 1387.
Home Office
secretary of State;Rt. Hon. C. T. Ritchie.
Under Secretary;Rt. Hon. J. Collings.
Home Rule, Ireland
Western Australia Meeting and Resolution
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 877
Hope, Mr. J. F. [Sheffield, Brightside]
Iron and Steel Trade;Proposed Import Duty on Steel, Mar. 25, 1100.
Navy Estimates;Relationship between the Treasury and the Admiralty, etc., Mar. 21, 799.
Horner, Mr. F. W. [Lambeth, N.]
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 689.
Horses
Army
South African War, see that title.
Weight carried by Horses
O. Mr. A. Lee, Mar. 15, 149.
Ireland;Horse-breeding in, Selection of Stallions, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 866.
Horticulture
Apples and Pears, Growth of;Experiment Stations proposed
Q. Sir J. Rankin; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 22, 855.
Hospitals
Ireland;Vote for, Mar. 25, 1129.
Scotland, Highlands and Islands;Difficulty of securing Accommodation, Legislation proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 15, 86.
[see also titles Army and South African War].
ospitals (Exemption from Rates) Bill
Petition, Mar. 27, 1487.
Houldsworth, Sir W. H. [Manchester, W.]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R. Mar. 20, 573.
Hounslow
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation
O. Lord Belhaven and Stenton, Mar. 26, 1282.
House of Commons
see Parliament.
House of Lords
see Parliament.
Housing of the Working Classes
Tower Hamlets;Blakesley Street Board School Scheme, Re-housing Questions
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 25, 1104.
Housing of the Working Classes Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 19, 425.
Order for Second Reading;Bill withdrawn, Mar. 22, 881.
Housing of the Working Classes and Rating Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 26, 1387.
Hull, Barnsley, and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 26, 1290.
Hutton, Mr. J. [Yorkshire, Richmond]
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Summer Uniforms, Mar. 26, 1377.
Cottage Homes Bill, 1899;Recommendations of Select Committee, Mar. 21, 718.
Hyde Park Gates
Allowing Cabs to pass through, etc.
Q. Col. Tufnell; A. Mr. A. Douglas, Mar. 18, 234.
I
Ilford
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation
O. Lord Tweedmouth, Mar. 26, 1280.
Imperial Revenue
see Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom.
Imports and Exports
Iron and Steel Trade, see that title.
Income Tax
Officers serving in South Africa;Proposed Exemption
Q. Major Rasch; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 26, 1360.
Petitions for alteration of Law, Mar. 15, 57; Mar. 18, 217; Mar. 20, 558; Mar. 23, 989.
India
secretary of State;Rt. Hon. Lord G. Hamilton.
Under Secretary;Earl of Hardwicke.
Ancient Monuments, see sub-heading Monuments.
Army
Commander-in-Chief;Appointment of Sir P. Palmer, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1091.
Drafts for India;Military Proposals of the Government
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 166.
Garrison Churches;Use of Government Churches for Scottish Presbyterian Soldiers
Debate (Lords) Mar. 25, 1068.
Military Outposts beyond the Frontier in 1898, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 74.
Separate Army System
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 134.
Staff Corps;Petition from Officers for redress of Grievances, Mar. 20, 558; Mar. 22, 844; Mar. 26, 1347.
Bijapur, Vandalism at;Lord Stanmore's Article
Os. Lord Stanley of Alderley, Earl of Hardwicke, Mar. 19, 385.
Crops;Condition of Winter Crops in Bombay and Madras, etc.
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 75.
Currency
Gold Reserve, Amount of
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 22, 852.
Silver Coinage;Number of Rupees coined in 1900, Average profit per Rupee, etc.
Q. Mr. Grenfell; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 26, 1359.
Famine;Provision for Orphans
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 76.
Khawas Khan Tomb;Preservation of Ancient Monuments
O. Earl of Hardwicke, Mar. 19, 387.
Land Revenue
Surat District, Amount Received from Money-lenders, etc.
Q. Mr. Caine; A Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 76.
Monuments;Preservation of Ancient Monuments
Os. Lord Stanley of Alderley; Earl of Hardwicke, Mar. 19, 385.
Native Publications;Charge of Sedition against Mr. Malabari
Debate (Lords), Mar. 22, 834.
Public Works Department;Petitions of Officers, Return
Q. Mr. Kimber; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 74.
Return Ordered, Mar. 15, 59.
Queen Victoria's Memorial;Amount subscribed
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 75.
Sedition;Native Publications, Charges against Mr. Malabari
Debate (Lords), Mar. 22, 834.
Surat District, Land Revenue;Proportion received from Money-lenders, etc.
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 70.
Tombs;Preservation of Ancient Monuments;(see sub-heading Monuments).
"Indian Spectator"
Case of Mr. Malabari
Debate (Lords), Mar. 22, 834.
Industrial Schools
(see Reformatory and Industrial Schools)
Inebriate Acts
Rules for Retreats Presented, Mar. 20, 1266, 1348.
Inebriate Homes
Number of Persons committed under Inebriates Act, 1898
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 230.
Infanticide
Death Sentences;Alterations of the Law
Q. Sir B. Gurdon; A. Mr. J. Collings, Mar. 21, 715.
Inhabited House Duty
Petitions for Alteration of Law, Mar. 15, 57; Mar. 18, 217; Mar. 20,558; Mar. 23, 989.
Inland Revenue Buildings
Edinburgh, Construction of New Buildings;Supply of Suitable Stone, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Douglas, Mar. 18, 234.
Inman, James
Petition for Redress of Grievances, Mar. 20, 558.
Innishowen Coast
Harbour Accommodation;Proposed Grant
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 868.
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill
l. 2R., Mar. 21, 642.
Debate on Second Reading (Lords) Mar. 21, 642.
Bon&#x00E2; fide Traveller, Definition etc., 645.
Extension of Statutory distance, 644, 652, 656, 660.
Local Authorities, Powers of, 649, 653, 662, 664.
Intoxicating Liquors
Sale of, on Sundays;Petitions, Mar. 18, 201; Mar. 25, 1063; Mar. 26, 1260.
Inver
Disfranchisement of Householders;Landlord failing to Pay Rates
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 21, 725.
Ireland
Lord Lieutenant;Earl Cadogan.
Chief Secretary;Rt. Hon G. Wyndham.
Attorney General;Rt. Hon. J. Atkinson.
Solicitor General;Mr. D. P. Barton.
Lord Chancellor;Lord Ashbourne.
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Act;Section 17, Subsection (a)
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 20, 1371.
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Department
Junior Inspector (Science and Art);Treasury Minute with reference to Superannuation, Mar. 23, 990; Mar. 25, 1002.
Vice-President-Seat in Parliament
Q. Mr. Coghill; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 15, 102.
Amnesty, see. sub-heading Political Prisoners
Armagh to Kingscourt Railway;Sale of Rights to Great Northern Railway Company
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 711.
Arran Islands, Fever Outbreak;Choice of Nurse;Visits of Medical Inspector, etc.
Q. Mr. Duffy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1113.
Assizes, see titles Antrim, Ulster, etc.
Bailieborough Union Ambulance;Payment for Horsing, Action of Local Government Board
Q. Mr. S. Young; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1114.
Ballybofey Sub-Postmastership;Appointment, Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 23, 994.
Bansha Graveyard;Holding Inquiry at Bansha instead of at Tipperary, proposed
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 871.
Banteer;Valuation of Tracer's Premises
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 420.
Beer;Purity of Irish Beer
Reference in Debate on Beer Bill, Mar. 27, 1471.
Belfast, see that title.
Berehaven Harbour;Accident to H.M.S. "Resolution"
O. Mr. Gilhooly, Mar. 23, 1043.
Birr Labourers' Cottages;Rejection of Applications, etc.
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 88.
Board of Works
Chairmanship;Filling Vacant Appointment
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 94; Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 252.
New Chairman;Salary, etc.
Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. Clancy, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 740.
Loans;Terms of Repayment
Q. Capt. Donelan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1376.
Bunagree Pier, Erection of;Site, Cost, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1372.
Cahir Post Office;Providing Suitable Premises
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1122.
Carlow District Lunatic Asylum;Rate-in-Aid
Q. Mr. Hammond; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 729.
Carrickmacross Workhouse Dietary;Action of Local Government Board
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 728.
Castlebar District Lunatic Asylum;Rate-in-Aid
Q. Mr. Ambrose; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 729.
Child Drunkenness;Number of Children arrested in 1900
Q. Mr. Flower; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar. 19, 408.
Civil Service;Monitor Candidates, Age Allowances
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 236.
Clones Railway Gates;Obstruction to Traffic, etc.
Q. Dr. Thompson: A. Mr. Long, Mar. 18, 252.
Committals, Number of Persons Committed for Trial in 1900;Return Presented, Mar. 23, 991; Mar. 25, 1062.
Congested Districts and Congested Districts Board, see those titles.
Constabulary, Royal Irish, see that title.
County Officials
Increase in Salaries by the Local Government Board
Debate on the Consolidated Fund Bill, Mar. 26, 1388.
Fermanagh, see that title.
Surveyors;Salaries of Assistant Surveyors, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 726.
Wexford Appeal Cases, etc., see title Wexford.
Dairy Industries;Preservatives, Pasteurisation, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 88.
Derriquin Castle Shooting Party;Firing from Public Road, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 726.
Dillon Estate, Sale by Congested District Board;Reservation of Sporting Rights
Q. Mr. Hayden; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 97.
Donegal, see that title.
Down Co., see that title.
Drift Survey;Date of Completion, etc.
Qs. Mr. Field; As. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 22, 858; Mar. 25, 1103; Mar. 26, 1365.
Dromard Petty Sessions, see that title.
Drug Contracts with Local Government;Irish Firms compelled to offer discount, etc., alleged
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1112.
Dublin, see that title.
Dungannon, see sub-heading Stewartstown.
Ebrington Barracks, Londonderry;Enlargement, Delay in Completion
Q. Marquess of Hamilton; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 701.
Edenderry, Portadown;Attacks on Roman Catholic Church
Q. Mr. Clancy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 251.
Education, for collective heading see that title.
Emigration Statistics, Presented, Mar. 22, 846; Mar. 25, 1061.
Enniskillen, see that title.
Estates;Sale of Landed Estates Court
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1376.
Number listed for Sale 1899, 1900, in which Insurance Companies are Practitioners
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 731.
Eyeries Postal Arrangements;Sunday Delivery proposed
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1381.
Factory Prosecutions in Co. Donegal;Costs of the Crown, Case of Squire v. Sweeney, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 26, 1378.
Fermanagh, see that title.
Financial Relations between Great Britain and Ireland
Inquiry proposed
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 739.
Naval Expenditure;Expenditure on Shipbuilding, see that sub-heading.
Finnigan and Muldowney Convicts;Remission of Sentence
Qs. Mr. Duffy, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 242.
Fisheries, see titles Donegal and Trawling.
Flax Cultivation;Restrictions as to discharge of Flax Water into Rivers
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar. 26, 1374.
Galway, see that title.
Geological Survey
O. Mr. Field, Mar. 25, 1255.
Glencolumbkille Ex-Sub-Postmaster, Date of Dismissal;Appointment of Serjeant of Royal Irish Constabulary
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1120.
Grand Canal;Tonnage Rate for Inland Waterway, Boats, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Gerald Balfour, Mar. 26, 1383.
"Granuaille";Congested Districts Boards' Steamer, Annual Repairs, and Londonderry Firm
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1109.
Greystones Pier and Harbour, Defective Works, County Surveyor's Report, etc.
Q. Mr. Cogan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 96.
Gweebarra Bridge, Repair of;Donegal County Council Resolution
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1111.
Halpin, Mr.;Abandoning Proceedings against, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 19, 419.
Home Rule;Western Australian Resolution
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 877.
Horse Breeding, Selection of Stallions, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 866.
Hospitals and Charities, Vote for, Mar. 25, 1129.
Innishowen Coast;Harbour Accommodation, Proposed Grant
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 868.
Justice, Administration of;Maladministration alleged
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25. 1245.
Kerry, see that title.
Killarney;Railway Rates, Inequality of
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 101.
Killydysart District Ceuncil;Payment of Account due to Mr. M'Inerney, Action of Local Government Board
Qs. Major Jameson, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1111.
Kilmallock District Council;Labourers' Cottages, delay in Issuing Provisional Order, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 729.
Kilrush Pier;Board of Trade Inquiry into Ownership, etc.
O. Major Jameson, Mar. 25,1245.
Kinnagoe Bay, Moville;Improvement of Landing Accommodation
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 126, 1370.
Knockbrack Snb-Post-Otfice;Reopening
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1119.
Labourers' Cottages, for collective heading, see that title.
Land Commission, for collective heading, see that title.
Land Purchase in Wexford, see title Wexford.
Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan;Dublin Castle Authorities, overriding of the Law, etc.
Qs. Mr. T. M. Healy, Mr. T. W. Russell; As. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 15, 97; Q. Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 18, 248.
Motion (Mr. T. W. Russell), Mar. 15, 111.
Lifford Bridge;Strabane Urban Council refusing to contribute towards maintenance, alleged
Q. Mr. M'Fadden: A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1375.
Lights Hoard, Allowance for Refreshments Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 738.
Lights and Lighthouses, see that title.
Limavady Water Supply;Action of Local Government Board, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 869.
Limerick, see that title.
Live Stock;Improvement in Breeding, Transferring Grant from Royal Dublin Society to Department of Agriculture
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 243.
Local Government Act, Working of;Policy of the Local Government Board, etc.
Debate on the Consolidated Fund Bill, Mar. 26, 1388.
Local Government Board County Officials, see that sub-heading.
Sealed Orders
O. Sir T. Esmonde, Mar. 26, 1390.
Local Government Rules and Orders
Date of Lodging Petitions for hearing at Spring Assizes
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 15,100.
Laying Return on the Table
Qs. Mr. Clancy, Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15,87.
Londonderry, see that title.
Lough Foyle;Salmon Fishery Licences Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 20, 1369.
Lough Neagh;Failure of Drainage Works, Giving Controlling Power to County Councils, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 732.
Lunatic Asylums, for collective beading, see that title.
Lunatics;Criminal Lunatics, Defraying maintenance out of Local Hates
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1379.
Lurgan Disturbances;Nationalist Procession on St. Patrick's Day
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 872.
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace;for collective heading see that title.
Maiden Rocks, Larne;Improvement of Light and Buoys, Delays
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 738.
Mayors, Exclusion of, from Commissions of Assize
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Atkinson. Mar. 19, 419.
Meat and Forage for the Army;Importation of Foreign Meat and Forage Debate in Com. of Supply. Mar. 15, 189.
Monitors;Civil Service Candidates, Age Allowances
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamlain, Mar. 18, 236.
Mullingar, see that title.
Mullough;Police Malpractices, Dismissal of Officers, Case of Ryan, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1245, 1253, 1257.
National Education;for collective beading see title Education.
National Education Office;Vacancies for Second Division Clerks
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 417.
National Library;Number of Assistant Librarians and Attendants, Want of Accommodation, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1373.
National School Teachers, see that title.
Naval Expenditure;Expenditureon Shipbuilding in Ireland
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 22, 949, 969; Mar. 13, 1004, 1009, 1050.
Qs. Mr. Joyce, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26, 1381.
Establishment of Dockyard at Cork proposed, etc.
Qs. Mr. McGovern, Mr. Crean; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 69.
Omagh District Cemetery;Delay in payment of Loan, Closing Drumragh Burial Ground, ete.
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 90.
Ormond Electoral Division;Transfer to Borrisokane Union, etc. Q. Sir T. Ksmonde; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 244.
Ph&#x0153;nix Park, see title Dublin.
Piers and Harbours;for collective heading see that title.
Political Prisoners;Amnesty
Q.Mr. Delany; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 231.
Poor Law Medical Officers;Holidays, Action of Local Government Board
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 727.
Poor Law Superannuation Bill;Charge on Local Rates
Qs. Mr. Murnaghan, Mr, Daly; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 417.
Pork and Bacon contracts for the Navy;Expenditure in Ireland
Qs. Mr. Joyce, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26, 1382.
Portadown, see that title.
Portumna;Retired Postman's (T. Madden) Pension claim.
Q. Mr. Roche; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar.22, 875.
Post Office, for collective heading see that title.
Potatoes, Electro-Culture of;Result of Investigations
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 731.
Prisoners, see sub-headings Names of Prisoners.
Queen Victoria, Funeral of;Day of General Mourning, Publicans compelled by Police to close, etc.
Qs. Mr. C. O'Kelly, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 240.
Queen's Colleges at Cork, Belfast, and Galway;Cost, etc. Q. Mr. Roche; A. Mr. "Wyndham, Mar. 18, 240.
Railways, for collective heading see that title.
Reformatory and Industrial Schools;Lord Lieutenant's Order, etc.
Qs. Mr. Field, Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1250.
Representative Peers, see that title.
Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom, see that title.
Roads, for collective heading see that title.
Roman Catholic University, sec subheading University Education Question.
Roxboro' Rd. Schools;Premises let to Dean Greg, etc.
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15,91.
Rural District Councils
Account Audits;Fees
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 734.
Labourers' Cottages;Proposed extension of powers
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 247.
Ryan, Case of, see title Mullough.
Salmon Fisheries, see that title.
Schull Letter Carrier;Wages
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1381.
Shillelagh Union, see that title.
Sligo Co., see that title.
Sneem Pier;Goods Store Erection, etc.
Q. Mr. Roland; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 725.
Stewartstown;St. Patrick's Day Meeting, Proclamation
Qs. Mr. Doogan, Mr. Flavin, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 95
O. Mr. Doogan, Mar. 25, 1259.
Stranorlar District;Labourers' Cottages.
Delay in Issuing Provisional Order
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 867.
Thomastown, see that title.
Trade, Board of, Irish Department, see title Trade, Board see of.
Trawling, see that title.
Ulster, see that title.
University Education Question
Petitions against Establishment of Roman Catholic University, Mar.
27, 1438.
Royal Commission;Inquiry into Trinity College proposed, etc,
Qs. Mr. Bryce, Sir T. Esmonde, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1123.
Valuation for Rating Purposes Banteer
Q. Mr. Flynn; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 420.
Belfast;Return
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 737.
Waterford Assizes;Tallow Conspiracy Case, Number of Jurors ordered to stand aside
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 18, 249.
Westport, see that title.
Wexford, see that title.
White Estate. Bantry, Date of Sale
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1375.
Workhouses;for collective heading, see that title.
Irish Language
National Schools;Extra Subject Fees, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1118.
Post Office;Delivery of Letters addressed in Irish
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1119.
Iron and Steel Trade
Import Duty on Steel, proposed
Q. Mr. F. Hope; A. Sir M. H. Beach. Mar. 25, 1100.
Isolation Hospitals Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 21, 743.
Italy
Trade Report Presented, Mar. 21, 636.
J
"Jackal," H.M.S.
Leave of Absence for Officers and Men Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 18, 225.
Jamaica
Annual Report Presented, Mar. 18, 200.
Jameson, Major J. E. [Hare, W.]
Killydysart District Council;Account due to Mr. M'Inerney, Action of Local Government Board, Mar. 25, 1111, 1112.
Mullough;Police Malpractices, Dismissal of Officers, Case of Ryan, Mar. 25, 1245.
Navy
Carpenters' Pay Complaints, Mar. 23, 1052.
Compassionate Allowances to Wives and Children of Warrant Officers, Mar. 23, 1052.
Trawling, Protection of Irish Fisheries, Mar. 23, 1052.
Warrant Officers, Status of, Mar. 23, 1051.
Piers and Harbours
Ireland;Ownership of Kilruah Pier, etc., Mar. 25. 1245.
Vote for, Mar. 23, 1040.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, etc., Mar. 21, 765.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2K. Mar. SO, 578.
Japan
Trade Report Presented, Mar. 21, 630.
Jeffreys, Mr. A. F. [Hants, N. |
Brewers' Licences;Returns, Proposed Changes, Mar. 25, 1101.
Justices and the Oath of Allegiance, Mar. 19, 408.
Jenner, Mr.
Murder of, in Somaliland
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19, 484.
Jessel, Capt- H. M. [St. Pancras, S.]
Militia Allowance;Militiaman dying during Embodiment, Widows' allowances, Mar. 2, 851.
Johnston, Mr. W. [Belfast, S.]
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Committee. Mar. 18, 256.
Johnstone, Mr. J. H. [Sussex, Horsham]
Beer Bill, 2R. Mar. 27, 1454
Jones, Mr. B. [Swansea, District]
Workhouse Dietary;New Dietary Order, Mar. 21, 718.
Jordan, Mr. J. [Fermanagh, S.]
Enniskillen
Land Appeals;Date of next Sitting, Mar. 18, 251.
Post Office;Date of Opening New Post Office, Mar. 23, 876.
Fermanagh County Officials' Salaries;Inquiry, Mar. 18, 96; Mar. 18, 250.
Labourers' Acts;Labourer living in Cottage belonging to Farmer, Claiming Allowance of Land, Mar. 21, 732
Joyce, Mr. M. [Limerick]
Borax;Prohibiting use of, for Food Preservative, proposed, etc., Mar. 21, 719.
Navy
Expenditure on Shipbuilding in Ireland, Mar. 26, 1381, 1382
Pork and Bacon Contracts;Expenditure in Ireland, Mar. 26,1382
Protection of Irish Fisheries, etc., Mar. 33, 1000; Mar. 25, 1146, 1147
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Position of, Mar. 31, 746; Mar. 23, 1000.
Roxboro' Road School;Premises to let to Dean Greg, etc., Mar. 15, 91.
Trawling;Names and Number of Gunboats, Mar. 25, 1122.
Joyce, Nurse
.sec Shillelagh Union.
Jurymen
Ireland
Kerry Assizes
Q. Mr. J. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 244.
Waterford Assizes;Tallow Conspiracy Case
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 18, 249.
Scotland;Kilmarnock Sheriff Court;S. Reid, Absent Juryman
Q. Mr. Cochrane; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 413.
Justice
Administration in Ireland;Maladministration, etc., Alleged
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1245.
Justices
see title Magistrates and Justices of the Peace.
K
Kearley, Mr. H. E. [Devonport]
Navy
Canteen System, Mar. 23, 1015.
Coaling Stations, Garrisoning with the Marines, Handing over Responsibility to the Admiralty,] etc., Mar. 35, 1133.
Engine-room Complement, Dearth of Artificers, etc., Mar. 23, 1013.
Executive Engineer Officers -Sitting on Courts-Martial, Mar. 23, 1014.
Gunnery;Position of Marines, etc., Mar. 23, 1015.
Increase in Personnel of the Navy, Royal Naval Reserve, etc., Mar. 21,806.
Pensions;Chief Petty Officers and Engine-room Artificers, etc., Mar. 23, 1016.
Recruiting in Country Districts, Mar. 25, 1143.
Shipbuilding, Delays in Construction, etc., Mar. 21, 802.
Victualling, Mar. 23, 1014.
Warrant Officers, Treatment of, Mar. 23, 1012.
Sittings of the House;Saturday Sitting, Business of Supply, Mar. 22, 926.
South African War
Pensions for Soldiers' Widows and Orphans;Government Scheme, Mar. 21, 697, 808.
Warrant Officers, Treatment of Mar. 31, 808.
Keighley
Sunday Letter Deliveries;Undelivered Letters
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1105.
Kennedy, Mr. P. J. [Westmeath, N.
Live-Stock Breeding in Ireland;Grant to Royal Dublin Society, Mar. 18, 243.
Local Government Rules and Orders, Date of Lodging Petitions for Hearing at Spring Assizes, Mar. 15, 100.
Mayors;Exclusion of, from Commissions of Assize, Mar. 19, 419.
Rural District and Council Accounts Audits;Fees, Mar. 21, 734.
Kenyon-Slaney, Col. Wm. [Shropshire Newport]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1502.
Kerry Assizes
Number of Roman Catholic Jurors, Jury Challenging, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 244.
Prisoners conveyed 'handcuffed
Qs. Mr. T. O'Donnell, Capt. Donelan, Mr. Flynn, Col. Nolan; As. Mr. Wyndh'am, Mar. 18, 244.
Kessock Ferry
Conveyance of Mails as Passengers' Luggage
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain Mar. 18, 235.
Kilkelly, Mr.
Resident Magistrate, Date of Appointment, Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wynd-ham, Mar. 22, 871.
Killarney
Railway Rates, Inequality of;Complaints.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 101.
Killydysart
District Council;Payment of Account to Mr. M'Inerney, Action of Local Government Board.
Qs. Major Jameson, Mr. W. Redmond; As Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 20, 1111.
Kilmallock
District Council;Labourers' Cottages Scheme, Delay in issuing Provisional Order, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 729.
Kilmarnock
Sheriff Court;Case of S. Reid, Absent Juryman
Q. Mr. Cochrane; A. Mr. A. G.
Murray, Mar. 19, 413.
Kilrush Pier
Board of Trade Inquiry into Ownership, etc.
O. Maj. Jameson, Mar. 25, 1245.
Kimber, Mr. H. [Wandsworth]
India;Petitions of Officers of Public Works Department, Return, Mar. 15, 74.
Parliamentary Elections;Return, Mar. 15, 104.
King Charles I. Statue
Decoration Prohibited, etc.
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. A. Douglas, Mar. 22, 858.
King Edward VII.
Accession;Notification to Pope
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 741.
Declaration against Roman Catholicism, see Roman Catholicism.
King's Title;Scotland, Summonses and other Documents running in the name of Edward VII.
Qs. Mr. Black, Mr. J. Dewar, Mr. Pirie; As. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 18, 240.
King's Road Railway Bill
l. 2R.* Mar. 15, 1.
Kinnagoe Bay
Landing Accommodation, Improvement of
Q. Mr. O'Doherty: A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1370.
Kinnaird, Lord
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Com. of both Houses, Mar. 19, 377.
Kits
see Army,
Kitson, Sir J. [York. W. H. Colne Valley]
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1335.
Knockbrack
Sub-Post Office;Re-opening
Q Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain. Mar. 25, 1119.
Korea
Brown, Mr. M. Director General of Customs;Dismissal
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Vise, ('ran-; borne, Mar. 25, 1100.
L
Labour Laws
Africa, West;Return
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 71.
Labourers' Acts, Ireland
Labourer living in Cottage belonging to Farmer;Claiming Allowance of Land
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 732.
Labourers' Cottages, Ireland
Birr Union;Rejection of Applications, etc.
Q. Mr. Reddy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 88.
Kilmallock District Council;Delay in; issuing Provisional Order, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 729.
Occupiers of Labourers' Cottages and Membership of Public Board;Resignation of J. Magee, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 15, 101.
Rural District Councils;Proposed Exten of Powers
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 247.
Stranorlar District;Delay in issuing Provisional Order
Q. Mr. Bovle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 807.
Ladysmith
see South Africa War.
Lambert, Mr. G. [Devon, South Molton]
Army Establishment before South African War, Mar. 25, 1092.
Colvile, General, Case of;Lord Roberts' Despatch, Date of Reception at War Office, etc., Mar. 15, 61.
Foot-and-Mouth Disease;Importation of Skins, Mar. 18, 232.
Magistrates and the Oath of Allegiance, Mar. 18, 230; Mar. 21, 714.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 897.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Publishing Report;Settling Soldiers on the Land, etc., Mar. 25, 1180.
South African War
Gifts for the Troops;Delay in forwarding, Mar. 21, 098.
Helvetia Surrender;Allegation of Cowardice against Officer in Command, Alar. 18, 220.
Ladysmith, Siege of;Responsibility for Concentration of Stores, Mar. 21, 696.
Lindley Surrender;Responsibility of Gen. Colville, etc., Mar. 25, 1084.
Volunteers;Drill Arrangements at Depots, Mar. 25, 1088.
Supply Procedure;Committee Proposed, Mar. 21, 743.
Wheat Averages in March, 1900 and 1901. etc., Mar. 25, 1101.
Lambton, Mr. F. W. [Durham, S.E.]
South African Land Settlement Commission Report. Publishing Report;Settling Soldiers on the Land, etc., Mar. 25, 1178.
Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway
Pontefract Explosion, see Pontefract.
Land Commission Ireland
Clerks;Abstracter Class, Pay, etc.
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 722.
Dillon Estate, Sale of;Reservation of Sporting Rights
Q. Mr. Hayden; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 97.
Donegal Sub-Land Commission;Date of next Sitting
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 33, 864.
Enniskillen Appeals;Date of next Sitting
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr.; Wyndham, Mar. 18, 251.
Limerick;Commissioners raising Rents Resolution of Kilmallock District Council, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 730.
Land Purchase, Ireland
see Wexford.
Land Registry
Number of Titles Registered since 1862;Working of Land Transfer Act, 1897, etc.
Q. Sir. W. Foster; A. Sir K. Finlay, Mar. 25, 1104.
Land Tax Commissioners' Names Bill
Introduction of Bill
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1385.
Land Transfer Act, 1897
Order in Council further postponing operation of Order in Council of 18th July, 1898, Presented, Mar. 26, 1265, 1348; Mar. 27, 1438.
Landed Estates Court, Ireland
Sale of Estates
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wynd-ham, Mar. 26, 1376.
Number listed for Sale 1899&#x2013;1900 in which Insurance Companies are Practitioners, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 731.
Langley, Mr. B. [Sheffield, Attencliffe]
German-made Brushes, Importation of, Mar. 15, 78.
Guns for the Army;Purchase of Foreign-made Guns, etc., Mar. 15, 66.
Lansdowne, Marquess of, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
China;Anglo-Russian Dispute at Tientsin, etc, Mar. 21, 639.
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Mar. 26, 1288.
War Office Administration;Lord Wolseley's Indictment of the System Introduced in 1895;Lord Wolseley' Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 13, 15, 16, 17, 26, 28, 34.
Lea
London County Scheme for Erecting Rifle Range
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1274, 1281, 1284.
Lead Poisoning
Amended Special Rules for the Manufacture of Earthenware and China Presented, Mar. 27, 1439.
Q. Mr. Coghill; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 15, 77.
Government Contracts;Use of Leadless Glaze
Qs. Mr. Talbot; As. Lord Stanley, Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1364.
Number of Cases, 1899 and 1900;Return
Q. Mr. J. Heath; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 231.
Return Presented, Mar. 19, 396.
Reports on the Use of Lead in the Manu, facture of Pottery Presented, Mar. 19365, 395.
Leamy, Mr. E. (.Kildare, N.]
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Mar. 25, 1096.
Lee, Mr. Arthur [Hants, Fareham]
American Army System, Mar. 15, 141, 144.
Army Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, Mar. 15, 141.
Volunteers;Regimental Serjeant-Majors, Granting Warrant Rank, proposed, Mar. 25, 1090.
War Office;Releasing Staff Officers for Service in the Field, Objections to, Mar. 15, 147.
Legal Expenses
Miscellaneous Expenses, Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Legge Col. H. [St. George's, Hanover Square]
Piccadilly, Widening of, Mar. 18, 234.
Legitimist Jacobite League
Wreaths sent to Decorate King Charles' Statute on Jan. 30, 1901;Decoration Prohibited
Q. Mr.W. Redmond; A. Mr. Douglas, Mar. 22, 858.
Leigh, Sir J. [Stockport]
Pay of Soldiers in South Africa;Arrears Mar. 22, 851.
Leng, Sir J. [Dundee]
Fife and Forfar Yeomanry;Date of Return, etc, Mar. 15, 62.
Greenwich Hospital and Travers' Foundation;Annual Reports, Mar. 15, 70.
Licensing Legislation, Mar. 19, 407.
Patent Acts;Committee's Report, Mar. 22, 854.
Unclaimed Funds, Amount of, etc., Mar. 18, J29.
Wireless Telegraphy
Adoption by British Steamship Companies, etc., Alar. 18, 235.
Navy;Cruisers accompanying the "Ophir," Mar. 26, 1355.
Levy, Mr. M. [Leicestershire, Loughborough]
Agricultural Land Rating Act;Renewal, Mar. 26, 1385.
Vaccination;Local Government Board, Circular, Mar. 15, 80.
Lewis, Mr. H. [Flint, Boroughs]
Africa;British East Africa Military Expeditions, Mar. 25, 1203, 1204.
China;Anti-Foreign Rising, Cost of Operations, Mar. 15, 74.
Fishery Harbours, Development of, Mar. 25, 1134.
Frozen Meat for the Army, Mar. 15, 191.
Horses, Loss of, in South Africa, Mar. 15, 191.
Income Tax;Rebates difficulty, etc., Mar. 25, 1202.
Inebriate Homes;Number of Persons committed, Mar. 18, 230.
Korea;Dismissal of Mr. Brown, Mar. 25, 1100.
Land Tax Commissioners' Names Bill;Introduction proposed, Mar. 26, 1385.
Mark IV. Ammunition;Breaking-up Bullets, Mar. 15, 67.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 879, 892.
Navy
Comparisons with Foreign Powers, Mar. 25, 1134.
Contracts;Penalties for delays. Mar. 26, 1356.
Parliamentary Debates";Delay in Publishing, Mar. 25, 1203.
Post Office Accommodation at Railway Stations, Mar. 25, 1203.
Sittings of the House;Saturday Sitting. Business of Supply, Mar. 22, 926.
Slavery in Zanzibar and Pemba, Mar. 25, 1099, 1100.
South African "War;Clothing for the Troops. Flannel Underclothing, Mar. 21. 699.
United States, Removal of British Factories to. Mar. 21, 712.
lewis, Island of
Congested Condition of;Petition from Stornaway Parish Council, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 15, 87.
Crofters' Holdings;Purchase of Land
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 414.
Road Construction
Carloway and Stornoway
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 21, 723.
Gravir and Cromore;Road Construction
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1367.
Libel Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 15, 128
Libraries
Public Libraries Bill, see that title.
Licensing Board Bill
l. 1R.* Mar. 18, 215.
Licensing Law Amendment Bill
l 1R.* Mar. 26, 1236
Licensing Sessions Bill
Petition, Mar. 26, 1266.
Lifford Bridge
Strabane Urban Council refusing to Contribute towards Maintenance, alleged
Q Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Wynd-ham, Mar. 26, 1375.
Light Railways, Scotland
see Highlands and Islands.
Lights Board, Ireland
see Ireland.
Lights and Lighthouses
Communication with the Shore, Making available for Private Messages, etc.
Q. Mr. C. McArthur; A. Mr. Han-bury, Mar. 19, 410.
Irish and Scotch Lighthouse Boards;Reconstitution proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, Mm: 15, 80.
Loch Carloway;Erection of Beacon on Tanasgeir
Q Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray Mar. 26, 1367.
Maiden Rocks, Larue;Improvement o Light and Buoys, Delays
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 738.
Limavady
Water Supply;Action of Local Government Board, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wynd-ham, Mar. 22, 869.
Limerick
Land Commissioners liaising Rents;Resolution of Kilmallock District Council, etc.
Q. Mr. Lundon; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 730.
Lunatic Asylum;Rate-in-aid, Delay in Payment
Qs. Mr. Lundon, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 864.
Roxboro' Road School;Premises let to Dean Greg, etc.
Q. Mr. Joyce; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 91.
Lindley Surrender
see South African War.
Liquor Traffic Local Veto (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, Mar. 10, 392.
Liquor Traffic and Liquor Licensing Laws
Bona fide Travellers;Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, see that title.
Brewers' Licences, Returns, proposed Changes;Brewers who use Malt and those who use Substitutes, etc.
Q. Mr. Jeffreys; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 25, 1101.
Child Drunkenness;Number of Children arrested 1899&#x2013;1900.
Qs. Mr. Flower; As. Mr. Ritchie, Mr. A. G. Murray, Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 407.
Ireland;Leslie v. Justice of Monaghan, see Ireland.
Reforms;Legislation
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 19, 407.'
Live Stock
Breeding in Ireland, see Ireland.
Liverpool
Licensing Authorities' Action as to Prink served to Children under thirteen.
References to in Debate on Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, Mar. 20, 577, 593.
Llandrindod Wells Water Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 18, 216.
Llanelly and Mynydd Mawr Railway Bill
l. Bill not to be proceeded with, Mar. 21, 034.
Lloyd-George Mr. D. [Carnarvon, etc.]
Army Reform Scheme, Pay in South Africa, etc., Mar. 15, 185.
Ashanti Rising, Cause of the Rising, Policy of the Military Expedition, etc., Mar.15, 438.
China;Tientsin, Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 21, 703.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations on Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22 899.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Publishing Report-Settling Soldiers on the Land, etc. Mar. 19, 472, 473; Mar. 25, 1189.
Supply, Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating and putting as Lump Sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 302.
Local Authorities Officers' Superannuation Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 22, 929.
Petitions, Mar. 25 1080; Mar. 2G, 1346; Mar. 27, 1437.
Local Government
President;Rt. Hon. W. H. Long.
Parliamentary Secretary;Mr. T. G. Law-son.
Local Government Ireland
see Ireland.
Local Government (Scotland) Act (1894) Amendment Bill
Petition, Mar. 20, 558.
Local Loans Fund
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Loch Carloway
Beacon, Erection of, on Tanasgeir
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 20, 1367.
Locomotive Explosion
Pontefract Accident
Q. Mr. Bell; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, Mar. 15, 79.
London
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1276.
London (City) School for Orphans of Freemen Bill
l. 2R.* Mar. 21, 634.
Attorney-General's Report, Mar. 21, 633.
London County Council
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation Debate (Lords), Mar. 20, 1274, 1281, 1284, 1288.
London County Council (Tramways and Street Widenings) Bill
c. Ordered, Mar. 19, 391.
1R.* Mar. 21, 691.
2R. * Mar. 20, 1290.
London School Board
School Accommodation;Calculating Deficiencies
Q. Mr. Talbot; A. Sir. J. Gorst, Mar. 20, 1365.
London Scottish Volunteers
Relief Detachment Sent to South Africa;Date of Return, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 65.
London, Tilbury, and Southend Railway
Overcrowding Carriages
Q. Mr. Gray; A. Mr. G. W. Balfour, Mar. 20, 1360.
London, Tilbury, and Southend Railway Bill
c. Report,* Mar. 20, 1346.
London University
Vote for, Mar. IS, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
London Water (Purchase) Bill
c. 2R. Mar. 20, 1291.
London Water 'Purchase) Bill
Debate on Second Reading (Commons), Mar. 26, 1291.
Outside Areas
Population and Estimated Increase, etc., 1305, 1317.
Representation on Water Board, 1315, 1332, 1334, 1336.
Severance, 1299, 1304, 1308.
Water Hoard;Constitution, etc. 1300 1311, 1315, 1318, 1322, 1328, 1332.
Water Committee of 1880, Recommendations, 1293, 1312, 1314.
Londonderry
Assizes
Sending Trivial Cases for Trial;Case of King v S. Hagan, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar 25. 1110.
see also title Ulster.
Ebrington Barracks, see that title.
Shipbuilding Industry;Admiralty Contracts
Q. Mr O'Doherty; A. Mr. Arnold Forster, Mar 26, 1383.
Macarlney's, Mr., Election Speech
Os. Mr. O'Doherty, Mr. Macartney, Mar. 22, 950.
Loney, Sergeant
Theft of Government Foodstuffs at Maft-king;Proposed Remission of Sentence.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Brodriok, Mar. 23, 992.
Long, Rt. Hon. W. H.;President of the, Loral Government Board [Bristol, W.]
Avoch Harbour, Construction of, Mar. 18, 242.
Borax, Prohibiting Use of, as Food Preservative, etc. Mar 21, 719.
Clones Level Crossing, Mar 18, 253.
Cottage Homes Rill, 1899;Recommendations of Select Committee, Mar. 18, 719.
Fire Brigades;Report of Select Committee, Lesislation proposed, Mar. 18, 233.
Forehoe Guardians;Differences between Master and Guardians, Mar. 26, 1363.
Inspectors of Nuisances;Candidates' knowledge of Diseases of Animals, etc. Mar. 21, 720.
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1313.
Medical Officers of Health and Diseases of Animals;Requiring Test of Knowledge. Mar 21, 720.
Plague at Southampton;Reported Case, etc., Mar 23, 993.
Poor Law Medical Relief and the Franchise, Mar. 21, 717.
Tea, Importation of inferior Tea;Local Government Board Inspectors, etc., Mar 21, 716.
Tuberculosis;Local Government Board Regulations, Unlawful Seizures, etc., Mar. 22, 857.
Vaccination
Local Government Board Circular, Mar 15, 81.
Pauper Children, Mar. 21, 717.
Workhouse Dietary;New Dietary Order, Mar. 21, 718.
Long Eaton Gas Bill
c 2R.* Mar. 20, 557.
Longford
Canal Harbour, Dangerous State of;Extending Canals Protection Act to Ireland, Proposed
Q Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 870.
Kilkelly, Mr., Resident Magistrate;Date of Appointment, Salary, etc.
Q Mr. J. P. Farrell; A.Mr. Wynd-ham, Mar. 22, 871.
Looting in China
sec China.
Lord Advocate for Scotland
Rt. Hon. A. G. Murray.
Lord Chamberlain's Department
Additional Sum to Provide Insignia of the Distinguished Service Order
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1210, 1214.
Lord Chancellor
Earl of Halsbury.
Lord Chancellor of Ireland
Lord Ashbourne.
Lord Chief Justice of England
Baron Alverstone.
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
Earl Cadogan.
Lord Privy Seal
sec Privy Seal.
Lough, Mr. T. (Islington, W.]
Ashanti Rising;Military Operations Policy of Loot, etc., Mar. 18, 338, 352, 357, 359; Mar. 19, 444.
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1337.
Navy Estimates, Increase in Expenditure, etc., Mar. 25, 1129.
Savings Banks and Friendly Society Deficiencies, Mar. 25, 1201.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in Form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating and Putting as Lump Sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 268.
Lough Royle
Salmon Fishery Licences
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 36, 1360.
Lough Neagh
Drainage Works, Failure of;Giving Controlling Power to County Councils, etc
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 732.
Loveday, Mr.
Transvaal Concessions Commission Markham's, Mr., Attack on Mr. Love-day, Mar. 19, 454.
Lowe, Mr. F. W [Birmingham, Edghaston] Volunteer Serjeant-Majors, Bate of Pay, Mar. 19, 400.
Lowestoft Corporation Bill
l. 2R.,* Mar. 21, 634.
Attorney-General's Report, Mar. 21, 633.
Lowther, Eight Hon. J. [Kent, Thanet] Factories, Migration from England to Other Countries, Mar. 31, 712.
Questions;Absence of Ministers, Mar. 27, 1440.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill;Title of Bill Questioned, Mar. 20, 565.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18, 276.
Lowther, Mr. J. W.;Chairman of Committees [Cumberland, Penrith]
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 50
Standing Orders Relating to Tramway Schemes, Amendments to, Mar. 15, 45, 46, 47.
Supply
Discussions on particular Votes;Arrangements on both sides of the House with Chairman's consent, etc., Mar. 23, 1026.
Irrelevant Observations, Mar. 19, 183, 435, 447, 458, 459, 460, 436, 509; Mar. 23, 1046.
Main Question put;Members precluded from further discussion, Mar. 19, 553.
Navy and Army Estimates
General Discussion on first vote, Mar. 22, 977.
General Discussion taken on Vote A could not be continued on Vote 1, Mar. 23, 1025.
Procedure Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 19, 430.
Vote for Commission before Report has been issued, Mar. 19, 471.
Unparliamentary language, Mar. 19, 457.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 681.
Lucas, Mr. R. J. [Portsmouth]
Marines;Pension Regulations, Mar. 19, 403.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 30, 590.
Ludgate Hill Railway Station
Dangerous condition of, etc.
Os. Lord Monkswell; A. Earl of Hardwicke, Mar. 21, 667.
Lunacy
Ireland;Criminal Lunatics, Defraying Maintenance out of Local Rates
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1379.
Lunatic Asylums
Ireland
Grant in Aid;Delay in Paying, etc. Castlebar and Carlow District Asylums
Qs. Dr. Ambrose, Mr. Hammond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 729.
Cork
Qs. Mr. Gilhooly, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 1380.
Limerick
Qs. Mr. Lundon, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 864.
Mullingar District-Increase of Expenditure, Inquiry proposed
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 733.
Lundon Mr. W. [Limerick, E.]
Kilmallock District Council;Labourers' Cottages, Mar. 21, 729.
Limerick Lunatic Asylum;Rate-in-aid Mar. 22, 864.
Mullough;Police Malpractices. Dismissal of Officers, Case of Ryan, Mar. 25, 1253.
Rents in Co. Limerick, Mar. 21, 730.
Lurgan Disturbances
Nationalist Procession on St. Patrick's Day
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 872.
Lyttelton, Mr. A. [Warwick and Leamington]
Transvaal Concessions
Commission;Mr. Markham's Attack on Mr. Loveday, Mar. 19, 457, 468.
Supply of Water to Pretoria, etc., Mar. 19, 472.
M
Macartney, Mr. W. E. [Antrim. S.]
Navy
Armour-Piercing Shell, supply of, Mar. 22, 957.
Army and Navy Establishments;Conflicting Interests, Mar. 22, 959.
Boilers' Committee Recommendations, Mar. 22, 941, 960.
Criticism on Naval Expenditure, Mar. 22. 953.
Relative Position of England and other countries with reference to Naval Expenditure, Mar. 22, 953.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Position of, Mar. 21, 759.
Shipbuilding
Amount spent 1899, 1900, Mar. 21, 703.
Delay in New Construction, Mar. 22, 954.
Derry, Construction of Ships at;Mr. Macartney's Election Speech, Mar. 22, 950.
Kate of Shipbuilding, Mar. 12, 955.
Submarine Boats, etc., Mar. 22, 957.
Treasury Control;Relationship between the Admiralty and the Treasury, Mar. 22, 958.
Macdona, Mr. J. C. [Southwark, Rotherhithe]
Canadian Horses, Purchase of, for South Africa, Mar. 19, 399.
Macedonia
Turkish Excesses at Uscub, alleged
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Visc. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 406.
Maconochie, Mr. A. W. [Aberdeenshire, E.]
South African War;Shooting of British Subjects by Com. Delarey, alleged, Mar. 18, 220.
Macnamara, Dr. T. J. [Camberwell, N.]
Higher Elementary Schools;Number of Applications for Recognition, Mar. 19, 411.
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1331.
Standing Orders relating to Tramway Schemes, Amendments to, Mar. 15, 47.
McArthur, Mr. C. [Liverpool, Exchange]
Boy Sailor Scheme and the Royal Naval Reserve, Mar. 19, 409.
Lighthouses and Shore, Communication between;Making available for Private Messages, etc., Mar. 19, 410.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 677, 683.
McDermott, Mr. P. [Kilkenny N.]
Africa, West;Gold Mining Companies, Tax on Gross Receipts, Mar. 26, 1356.
Ashanti Operations;Destruction of Towns, etc., Mar. 26, 1357.
Financial Condition of Annexed Re-publics;Beewaarplaatzen, Mar. 26, 1349.
McFadden, Mr. E. [Donegal, E.]
Ballybofey Sub-postmastership, Mar. 23 994.
Factory Prosecutions in Co, Donegal, Mar. 36, 1378.
Flax Cultivation in Ireland, Mar. 26, 1374
Knock brack Sub-Post Office;Re-opening Mar. 25, 1119.
Lifford Bridge, Maintenance of, Mar. 26, 1375.
Londonderry Assizes;Sending Trivial Cases for Trial, Mar. 25, 1110.
McGovern, Mr. T. [Cavan, W.]
Ireland and Naval Construction;Amount spent in Ireland, etc., Mar. 15, 69.
McKenna, Mr. R. [Monmouth, N.]
British East African Protectorate, Increase in Supplementary Estimate, etc., Mar. 19, 487.
Telephone Districts;Transferring from Exchange Area to another, Mar. 18, 238; Mar. 21, 721.
McLachlan
Shot by Boers, see South African War;Shooting of British Subjects, etc.
Madden, T.
Retired Postman at Portumna;Pension Claim
Q. Mr. Roche; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 875.
Maddocks, Private
St. John Ambulance Brigade in South Africa;Pension for Widow
Q. Mr. Pierpoint; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1089.
Mafeking
see South African War.
Magee, Johnson
Resignation of;Occupiers of Labourers' Cottages and Membership of Public Boards
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 15, 101.
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace
Ireland
Kilkelly, Mr., Longford Resident Magistrate;Date of Appointment, Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 871.
Leslie v. Justices of Monagban, see Ireland.
O'Brien, Mr. K., Nationalist Member, Removal of
Qs. Mr. Cullinan, Mr. O'Dowd, Capt. Donelan, Mr. O'Doherty, Mr. K. O'Brien; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1114.
Stewartstown;St. Patrick's Day Meeting, Proclamation of, etc.
Qs. Mr. Doogan, Mr. Flavin, Mr. Flynn; As: Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 95.
Thomastown Petty Sessions District;Number of Protestant Magistrates, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 93.
Oath of Allegiance
Justices to take oath before two Justices in Petty Sessions
Qs. Mr. Lambert; As. Mr. Ritchie, Mr. J. Collings, Mar. 18, 230; Mar. 21, 714.
Justices who are Members of Parliament
Q. Mr. Jeffreys; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 19, 408.
Stipendiary Magistrates and Local Justices, Relative Position and Authority;Merthyr Tydvil Magistrate, etc.
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 25, 1100.
Maiden Rocks, Lame
Light and Buoys, Improvement of;Delays
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G Balfour, Mar. 21. 738.
Maidstone Election Petition
Shorthand Writer's Notes of Evidence;laying on the Table
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Sir R. Finlay, Mar. 21, 725.
Mail Service
American Mail Service, Time Occupied in Transit, etc., Returns Presented Mar. 28, 990 Mar. 25, 1081.
Scotland
Kessock Ferry, Inverness;Conveyance of Mails as Passengers' Luggage
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamlain, Mar. 18, 235.
Stornoway to Mallaig;New Steamer Service
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 237.
Wales
Vale of Clywd;Conveying Mails by Train, Proposed
Q. Mr. Roberts; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 82.
Majendie, Mr. J. H. A. [Portsmouth]
Navy
Chief Petty Officer's Grievances, Mar. 22, 946.
Food Supply to Lower Deck, Mar. 22, 945.
"Ocean" sending to China, Mar. 22, 947.
Submarine Boats, Mar. 22, 948.
Training Reforms, Mar. 22, 948.
Malcolm, Mr. I. Z. [Suffolk, Stowmarket]
Canada, Purchase of Horses for the Army Mar. 19, 399.
Fire Brigades;Report of Select Committee. Legislation Proposed, Mar. 18, 233.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 901.
Mallaig
Mails, see Stornoway.
Railway;Delay in Opening, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 855.
Manchester
Arsenical poisoning epidemic;References to in Debate on Beer Bill, Mar. 27, 1446, 1447, 1457, 1482, 1491, 1494, 1498.
Post Office Promotions;Telegraphist refunding Back Pay, etc.
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 721.
Manchester, Bishop of
Lord Chancellor's Patronage;Case of Rev. A. N. Vowler, Mar. 19, 389.
Manchester (Market Street Area) [Improvements Bill
l. 2R.* Mar. 19, 365.
Manchuria
see China;Anti-foriegn Rising.
Mansfield, Mr. H. [Lincoln, Spalding]
South African War;Gifts for the Troops Parcel Postage Rates, Mar. 18. 224.
Sending out free of charge, Mar. 21, 698.
Maple, Sir J. Blundell [Camberwell, Dulwich]
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 52.
Marines, Royal
China;Services of Marines in China Arnold Foster's, Mr., Statement, Mar. 18, 317.
Garrisoning Coaling Stations, see Coaling Stations.
Pay as Gunners, etc.
Q. Mr. Kearley, Mar. 23, 1015.
Pension Regulations
Q. Mr. R. Lucas; A. Mr. Arnold Forster, Mar. 19, 403.
Markets and Fairs (Weighing Cattle) Acts
Board of Agriculture Annual Report Presented, Mar. 26, 1265, 1348.
Markham, Mr. A. B. [Notts, Mansfield]
Questions to Ministers;Printing and Circulating Replies among Members, etc., Mar. 15, 105.
Transvaal Concessions Commission;Attack on Mr. Loveday, Mar. 19, 453, 476.
Marlborough, Duke of;Paymaster General
Disabled Soldiers, Pensions for, Mar. 25, 1073, 1079.
Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister Bill
Petition, Mar. 27, 1437.
Maxwell, Sir W.
References to in the Debate on the Ashanti Rising and Military Expedition, Mar. 18, 355, 356.
Mayors
Exclusion of from Commissions of Assizes, see Ireland;Mayors.
Meat
Contract for the Army, see Titles Army and South African War.
Medical Officers of Health
Diseases of Animals;Requiring Test of knowledge
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 720.
Merchant Shipping
"Avlona," Loss of, in Bilbao Harbour, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 406.
Boy Sailor Scheme and the Royal Naval Reserve;Number of Boys Enrolled, Refunding Light Dues, etc.
Q. Mr. C. McArthur; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 19, 409.
Cruisers for the Navy, see Navy;Cruisers.
Wireless Telegraphy;Adopting by British Steamship Companies, Post Office Requirements, etc.
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 235.
Merriman-Sauer Petition
Leave to be heard on the Question of Future Policy in South Africa;Petition Presented, Mar. 25, 1081.
Merthyr Tydvil
Stipendiary Magistrates and Local Justices;Relative Position and Authority
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 25, 1100.
Metropolitan Police Provisional Order Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 21, 691.
Metropolitan Railway
Ventilation, System of;Conditions of Act of 1898, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1363.
Metropolitan Water Companies (Amendment of Acts) Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 26, 1341.
Middlemore, Mr. J. T. [Birmingham, N.]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 605.
Midland Railway Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 20, 557.
Report,* Mar. 20, 1507.
Military Instruction (Schools and Cadets) Bill
c. 1R. * Mar. 19, 425.
Military Instruction (Schools and Cadets) Bill
l. 1R.* Mar. 25, 1063.
Military Man&#x0153;uvres Act 1897 Amendment Bill
Q. Col. Brookfield; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1093.
Military Works Acts
Estimate of Expenditure
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 26, 1359.
Militia
Allowances;Next-of-kin of Militiaman dying during Embodiment, etc.
Q. Capt. Jessel; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 22, 851
Army Corps, Militia Battalions for;Government Reform Proposals
Q. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 130
Compulsory Service
Brodrick's, Mr., Statement
Q. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 15, 135; Mr. C. Warner, 156
Disembodiment of Regiments embodied in November and December, 1900
Q. Sir G. Fardell; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1090.
Gordon Highlanders, 3rd Battalion, Strength of;Disembodiment proposed
Q. Dr. Farquharson; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 22, 850.
Officers for Line Regiments;Serving four years in Militia Regiment, previous to granting Commission, Duke of Bedford's Proposals, Mar. 19, 381.
Officers serving in Regular Army;Promotions
Q. Sir G. Fardell; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1091.
Reforms and Reorganization;Government Proposals;Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 156.
South African War, see that title.
Training;Battalions not embodied
Q. Mr. G. Boscawen; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 18, 222.
Militia Ballot
Prime Minister's Opinion, etc.
O. Sir Chas. Dilke, Mar. 15, 137
Milward, Col. V. [Warwick, Stratford-on-Avon]
Beer Bill, 2R. Mar. 27, 1447.
Supply Procedure;Proposed Committee of inquiry, Mar. 21, 742.
Tithe Averages;System of Ascertaining, Mar. 21, 715.
Mines (Eight Hours) Bill
Petitions, Mar. 20, 558; Mar. 22, 844; Mar. 23, 989; Mar. 25, 1081; Mar. 26, 1347; Mar. 27, 1438.
Mines and Quarries
Inspectors' Reports Presented, Mar. 26, 1265, 1348.
Ministerial Statements
Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords
Motion for Adjournment (Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman), Mar. 22, 882
Qs. Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, Mr. W. Redmond, Mr. C. Grant; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 705.
Qs. Mr. P. O'Brien, Mr. C. Grant, Mr. H. Lewis, Mr. E. Robertson, Mr. Crean; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 22, 877.
Monaghan
Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, see Ireland.
Monkswell, Lord
Army Classes in Public Schools, Mar. 19, 385.
Disabled Soldiers, Pensions for, Mar. 25, 1072, 1078, 1079.
Ludgate Hill and Snow Hill Railway Stations, Dangerous Condition of, Mar. 21, 667.
Monuments
Ancient Monuments in India, see India.
Morgan, Mr. D. J. [Essex, Walthamstow]
Finland;British Consular Agents, Mar. 18, 226.
Morley, Earl of;Chairman of Committees.
Public Libraries Bill, Com., Mar. 25, 1064.
Reading Clerk, and Clerk of Outdoor Committees;Appointment of Mr. E. H. Alderson, Mar. 15, 4.
South African War, Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War, Mar. 18, 208.
Morley, Bight Hon. John [Montrose, etc.]
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 897.
Morrell, Mr. G. H. [Oxon, Woodstock]
Training College Examinations;Qualitications for First Class, Mar. 19, 412.
Morton, Mr. E. J. C. [Devonport.]
Navy
Leakage;British Sailors joining American Navy, Mar. 23, 1038.
Personnel of the Navy;Most Important Element in the Navy, Mar. 23, 1035.
Promotion Regulations, Mar. 23, 1039.
Warrant Officers. Position of, Mar. 23, 1035.
Mottershead, W.
Anti-Vaccirrationist, Arrest of
Q. Mr. Bell; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 231.
Mount Edgcumbe, Earl of
Lord Chancellor's Patronage;Case of Rev. A. N. Vowler, Mar. 19, 388.
Moville
Police;Appointment of Roman Catholic Sergeant, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1108.
Muldowney
Irish Convict;Remission of Sentence proposed.
Qs. Mr. Duffy, Mr. J. Redmond; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 242.
Mull, Island of
Road Construction;Grants for Private Roads.
Q. Mr. Nicol; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 413.
Mullingar District
Lunatic Asylum;Increase of Expenditure, Inquiry proposed
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 733.
Mullough
Police Malpractices, Dismissal of Officers, Case of Ryan, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1245, 1253, 1257.
Murnaghan, Mr. G. [Tyrone, Mid]
Omagh District Cemetery;Loan, Closing Drumragh Burial Ground, etc., Mar. 15, 90, 91.
Poor Law Superannuation Bill;Charge on Local Races, Mar. 19, 417.
Murphy, Mr. J. (Kerry, E.)
Killarney Railway Rates;Complaints, Mar. 15, 101.
Murray, Rt. Hon. A. G.;Lord Advocate [Buteshire]
Avoch Harbour, Repair of, Mar. 15, 86; Mar. 22, 862; Mar.26, 1367.
Barra, Island of;Purchase of Land for Crofters and Cottars, Mar. 26, 1368.
Child Drunkenness;Number of Arrests Mar. 19, 407.
Congested Districts Board
Parliamentary Grant, Balance in Hand, etc., Mar. 19, 414.
Report;Date of Issue, Mar. 19, 415.
Crofters and Cottars;Commission Reports, Mar. 26, 1368.
Education
Greenock School Board;Providing Prizes out of School Fund, Mar. 21, 724; Mar. 22, 863.
Navigation Classes in Evening Schools, Mar. 21, 723.
Hospital Accommodation in the Highlands and Islands, Mar 15, 86.
Inver;Disfranchisement of Householders, Mar. 21, 725.
Kilmarnock Sheriff Court;S. Reid, Absent Juryman, Mar. 19, 414.
King's Title in Scotland, Mar. 18, 240.
Lewis, Island of
Congested Condition of, etc., Mar. 15, 87.
Crofters' Holdings, Mar. 19, 415.
Loch Carloway;Beacon, Erection of, etc. Mar. 26, 1367.
Poultry Breeding in the Highlands, Mar. 22, 862.
Road Construction
Applecross Cart Road, Mar. 18, 240.
Congested Areas. Mar. 18, 249; Mar. 19, 415.
Lewis, Island of, Mar. 21, 723; Mar. 26, 1367.
Mull, Island of, Mar. 19, 413.
Sheriffs' Salaries;Report of Committee, Mar. 22, 863, 864.
Small Holdings in Crofting Counties, Mar. 26, 1366.
Trawling
Broad Bay, Light keepers at Tiumpan Lighthouse Reporting Trawlers, etc., Mar. 22, 861.
Foula, Island of;Illegal Trawling, etc., Mar. 22, 861.
Number of Convictions in 1900, etc., Mar. 22, 860.
Muzzle-loading Guns
(see Navy;Guns)
N
Nannetti, Mr. J. P. [Dublin, College Green]
Army Estimates;Protest against Closure, Mar. 21, 828.
Coal for the Public Service;Coalfields in Ireland, etc., Mar. 25, 1224.
Navy
Belleville Boilers, Shipbuilding Contracts placed in Ireland, etc., Mar. 22, 969.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Mar. 25, 1152.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be Criticised in his Capacity of Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1237.
Stationery and Printing Contracts, Mar. 25, 1215, 1217.
National Debt
Annuities;Account Presented, Mar. 20. 565; Mar. 21, 636.
National Library, Ireland
see Dublin.
National School Teachers, Ireland
Holidays, Curtailment of;Memorial from Clergymen, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 416.
Salaries;Diminution of Salaries owing to Insufficient Attendance, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 415.
Naval Works Acts
Estimate of Expenditure
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 26, 1359.
Navigation Classes
Evening Schools in Scotland;Number of Scholars
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 21, 723.
Navy
First Lord;Rt. Hon. Earl of Selborne.
Secretary;Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster.
Civil Lord of the Admiralty;Mr. E. G. Pretyman.
Administration;Overworked Staff, no time to initiate Reforms, etc.
Debate on the Etimates, Mar. 21, 785; Mar. 22, 980.
Armour-piercing Shell, supply of
Os. Mr. Macartney, Mar. 22, 957; Mr. Arnold-Forster, 975.
Army and Navy Establishments;Conflicting Interests
O. Mr. Macartney, Mar. 22, 959.
Boatswains;Pay Grievance, etc.
O. Mr. Archdale, Mar. 25, 1147.
Boilers;Water-tube Boilers
Babcock and Wilcox type
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 770; Mar. 22, 987.
First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 334.
Belleville Type, Report of Committee
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 767; Mar. 22, 930; Mar. 23, 990, 1041, 1048.
First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 333.
Retention of, in Ships now in course of Construction, etc.
Q. Sir C. Furness; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 19, 403.
Training of Stokers, see subheading "Stokers."
"Britannia," H.M.S., see that title.
Canteen System
O. Mr. Kearley, Mar. 23, 1015.
Carpenters, Complaints as to Pay, etc.
O. Maj. Jameson, Mar. 23, 1052.
Chaplains;Roman Catholic Chaplains, Position of, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 743; Mar. 23, 996, 1040, 1044, 1049, 1054; Mar. 25, 1152.
Roman Catholic Chaplains on H.M. Ships
Q. Mr. Leamy; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1096.
Chief Petty Officers' Grievances, Insufficient Pension, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 22, 946; Mar. 23, 1016.
China, see that title;British Forces, etc.
Coaling Stations, see that title.
Contracts
Earthenware Goods;Use of Leadless Glaze
Q. Mr. Talbot; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26, 1364.
Penalties for Delays in 1900
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26, 1356.
Pork and Bacon, Purchase in Ireland
Qs. Mr. Joyce; Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26, 1382.
Courts-Martial, Engineers sitting on, see sub-heading Engineers.
Cromarty Firth, Suitability for Naval Station;Fortification proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1095.
Cruisers
Construction of;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 329.
Marine Cruisers, Number, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 22, 935, 977.
O. Mr. E. Robertson, Mar. 21, 776.
Dockyards, see that title.
Electricians, Position of, etc.;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 323
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 22, 946.
Engineers;Position of, etc.
Courts-Martial, Engineers Sitting on Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 23, 1010, 1014.
Dearth of Engineer Officers Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 23, 1005, 1009; Mar. 25, 1137.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 22, 935, 940; Mar. 23, 1055; Mar. 25, 1137.
First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 323.
United States Experiment
O. Mr. Arnold-Foster, Mar. 23, 1009.
Expenditure
Comparisons with France, Russia, United States, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 778; Mar. 22, 953.
Colonial Contributions
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 782, 783, 809; Mar. 22, 949, 979; Mar. 25, 1132, 1145.
Financial System of the Country;Relation between the Treasury and the Admiralty, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21. 799; Mar. 22, 958, 903.
Increase in;"Colossal" Expenditure Debate on the Estimates, Mar.21,777.
Financial Aspect of First Lord's Memorandum
Arnold-Forster's, Mr., Statement, Mar. 18, 317.
First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold Forster's Statement, Mar. 18. 313;Debate Mar. 21, 767; Mar. 22, 930.
Fleet Reserve, Royal;First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 320;Debate Mar. 22, 934, 981.
Fleets;Return
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 68; Os. Mr. E. Robertson. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1131, 1132.
Food
Complaints;Meal Hours, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 23, 1014, 1039, 1047.
Food Supplied to Lower Deck
O. Mr. Majendie, Mar. 22, 945.
Gaya Bay;Establishment of Naval Station Proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 70.
Goschen's, Mr., Services;Mr. Arnold-Forster on, Mar. 18, 313.
Greenwich Hospital and Travel's Foundation;Annual Reports
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Pretyman, Mar. 15, 70.
Gunboats for the Protection of Fisheries, see title Trawling.
Gunnery Practice;Irish Coast, Boat Slip at Tramore, Proposed
Os. Mr. Power, Mar. 23, 1019; Mr. J. Redmond, 1026.
Guns;Muzzle-loading Guns, Arming Ships with, First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 328.
Guns and Projectiles;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 327.
Harbours;Expenditure on Anchors and Moorings in connection with New Harbours;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 328.
Ireland;Expenditure on Shipbuilding, see Ireland.
"Jackal," H.M.S.;Leave of Absence for Officers and Men
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 18, 225.
Leave of Absence;Officers on Quarterdeck
Os. Mr. Majendie, Mar. 22, 947; Com. Young, Mar. 23, 999.
Machinery;Delay in Construction of Ships
Arnold-Forster's, Mr., Statement, Mar. 18, 330.
Merchant Cruisers, see sub-heading Cruisers.
Naval Works Acts;Estimate of Expenditure
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 26, 1359.
Officers
Leave of Absence, see that subheading.
Pay;ln-and out System of Half and Full Pay
O. Sir J. Colomb, Mar. 25, 1144.
Training
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 789; Mar. 23,997.
First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 326.
Pay;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 321.
Pensions for Widows and Orphans of Sailors who have fallen in South Africa, see South African War.
Personnel
Increase of;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 319.
Nationality of Personnel, Return
Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26, 1356.
Position of the Navy;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 315.
Powder and Gunnery Training;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 327.
Promotion Regulations
O. Mr. Morton, Mar. 25, 1039.
Recruiting;Scheme of Territorialising Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 22, 942; Mar. 25, 1143, 1148.
Reserve
Roy Sailor Scheme and Royal Naval Reserve;Number of Boys enrolled, etc.
Q. Mr. C. McArthur; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 19, 409.
First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 319;Debate, Mar. 22, 935.
Strengthening, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 806.
"Resolution," H.M.S.;Accident in Berehaven Harbour
O. Mr. Gilhooly, Mar. 23, 1043.
Royal Yacht, see title "Victoria and Albert."
Shipbuilding
Admiralty Overseers;Insufficient Responsibility, etc.
O. Sir F. Flannery, Mar. 22, 935.
Arrears in Construction, etc.
Appointment of Committee of Inquiry;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 331.
Causes of Delay;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 329.
Construction of Ships for Foreign Countries, Rapidity of Construction compared with the Construction of Ships for the British Navy
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 22, 965.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 22, 931, 954, 976, 982; Mar. 23, 995.
Expenditure on
Amount spent of, 1899, 1900
Q. Mr. Macartney; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 21, 703.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 780.
Ireland;Expenditure on Shipbuilding, see Ireland.
Largest Sum ever asked, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 328.
Programme for 1901;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 332;Debate, Mar. 22, 931.
Rate of Shipbuilding;England ahead of Foreign Powers
O. Mr. Macartney, Mar. 23, 955.
Ships struck off the List of so-called Effective Ships of the Navy;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 8, 328.
Shipwright's Rating;Rate of Pay
Q. Mr. G. Parker; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1095
Stokers
Position of, etc.;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 323.
Training;Human Element in connection with the Belleville Boilers.
Os. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 22, 966; Mr. Arnold-Forster, 986; Mr. Platt-Higgins, Mar. 23, 1005.
Strategy;institution of a School of Strategy at Greenwich, etc.
Os. Sir J. Colomb, Mar. 21, 789; Mr. Arnold-Forster, 981.
Strength of the Navy;Standard for Shipbuilding, Two or three Power Standard
O. Sir C. Dilke, Mar. 22, 963.
Submarine Cables, Cutting in War Time;United States Naval War Code
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 26, 1358.
Submarine Vessels;Decision of the Admiralty to Experiment with;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 332.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21. 772; Mar. 22, 948, 957, 976; Mar. 23, 1043,1048, 1053.
"Sybille," H.M.S., Wreck of;Officers and Men on Duty, Salvage Operations, etc.
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 21, 702.
Training, Period of Drill, etc.;First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 321, 322.
Training of the Personnel of the Fleet;Masts and Yards Training, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 784; Mar. 22, 980.
Training Ships;Stornoway and Loch broom, Proposed Visit to
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 22, 852.
Turbine Machinery of "Viper" and "Cobra";Tests
Q. Sir T. Wrightson; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 22, 852.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht, see title "Victoria and Albert."
Warrant Officers
First Lord's Memorandum, Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 324.
Status of
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 23. 998, 1007, 1012, 1035,1042, 1051; Mar. 25, 1148.
Treatment of Warrant Officers who have distinguished themselves in South Africa
Os. Mr. Kearley, Mar. 21, 808; Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 22, 982.
Wastage
British Sailors joining American Navy
O. Mr. Morton, Mar. 23, 1038.
Executive and Engineering Brandies
O. Sir J. Colomb, Mar. 25, 1139.
Water-tube Boilers, see sub-heading Boilers.
Watering of Battleships
O. Com. Young, Mar. 23, 999.
Wireless Telegraphy;Cperations conducted on Cruisers escorting "Ophir," etc.
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26, 1355.
Navy Estimates
Discussion on Motion that the Speaker leave the Chair, Mar. 21, 743.
First Lord's Memorandum;Mr. Arnold-Forster's Statement, Mar. 18, 313;Debate, Mar. 21, 767; Mar. 22 930
Procedure;General Discussion on Vote A, Continuing Discussion on Vote I
Debate, Mar. 23, 1025.
Sea and Coastguard Services [118, 625], Com. Mar. 22. 975; Mar 23, 995; Rep. Mar. 25, 1128.
Surpluses on Votes, Temporary application to meet Excesses on other Votes;Treasury Minute Presented, Mar. 27, 1439.
Wage etc., to Officers, Seamen, etc.;£;5,760,000, Com. Mar. 23, 1025; Rep. Mar. 25, 1128.
Newcastle-upon-Tyne and Gateshead Gas Bill
l. Report.* Mar. 22, 833.
Newnes, Sir G. [Swansea Town]
Civil Service;Compulsory Retirement, Age-limit, Mar. 15, 85.
Newton, Lord
Public Libraries Bill, Com. Mar. 25, 1063.
War Office Administration;Lord Wolseley's indictment of the System introduced in 1895, Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 29.
Nicaragua Canal
Convention between Great Britain and the United States;Correspondence Presented, Mar. 25, 1061, 1082.
Nicol, Mr. D. N. [Argyll]
Mull, Island of;Road Construction. Mar. 19, 413.
Scotch Volunteer Artillery;Rearmament, Mar. 21, 702.
Nolan, Col. J. P. [Galway, N.]
Army
Horses, Purchase of, etc., Mar. 15, 192.
Reform and Reorganisation;Government Proposals, Mar. 15, 164.
Roman Catholic Chaplains;Protection of Irish Fisheries;Naval Recruits among Irish Fishermen, etc., Mar. 23, 1045.
North-Eastern Railway Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 26, 1291.
Board of Trade Report Ordered, Mar. 26, 1345;Presented, Mar. 27, 1439.
North Shields
Telephone Charges
Q. Mr. L. Harris; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 859.
Northbrook, Earl of
India;Native Publications, Charge of Sedition against Mr. Malabari, Mar. 22, 840.
War Office Administration;Lord Wolseley's indictment of the System Introduced in 1895, Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 22, 26, 28.
Norton, Capt. C. W. [Newington, W.]
Army
Chairs for Military Hospitals, Mar. 15, 66.
Temporary Staff Officers;Outfit Allowance, Mar. 18, 223.
Norton, Lord
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 650.
Notting Hill Electric Lighting Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 26, 1291.
Nottingham Corporation Bill
l. Ordered that the Bill be not further proceeded with, Mar. 18, 197.
Nuisances, Inspectors of
Candidates' Knowledge of Diseases of Animals, etc.
Q. Mr. Meld; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 720.
Nurses
Irish Workhouses, see Workhouses.
O
Oakham Water Bill
l. Report,* Mar. 26, 1265.
Oath of Allegiance
Magistrates and Justices of the Peace, see that title.
O'Brien. Mr. J. F. X. [Cork]
Greenock School Hoard;Providing Prizes out of School Fund, Mar. 21, 724; Mar. 22, 862.
Silesia, British Army Enlistments in, alleged, Mar. 26, 1351.
O'Brien, Mr. K. [Tipperary, Mid]
Nationalist Member, Removal of, from Commission of the Peace
Qs. Mr. Cullman, Mr. O'Dowd, Capt. Donelan, Mr. O'Doherty; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1114.
Road Length Limits;Local Government Order, Mar. 15, 100.
O'Brien, Mr. P. [Kilkenny]
Board of Works (Ireland) Chairmanship Filling Vacant Appointment, Mar. 15, 94; Mar. 18, 252.
New Chairman, Mar. 21, 740.
Civil Service;Monitor Candidates, Age Allowances, Mar. 18, 236.
Dublin Post Office Revision, Mar. 18, 254.
Mark. IV. Ammunition;Breaking up Bullets, Mar. 22, 849.
Ministerial Statements in the House of Lords;Communicating to the House of Commons, Mar. 22, 877.
Ph&#x0153;nix Park, Dublin;Use of, for Military Purposes, Mar. 15, 90.
Queen's Stores, North Wall, Dublin;Sale to Shipping Company, Mar. 18, 249.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration Against;Protests of Public Bodies, Mar. 18, 255.
South African War;Peace Negotiations with Gen. Botha, Mar. 25, 1085.
O'Brien, Mr. W. [Cork]
Navy Estimates Discussion, Mar. 23, 1032.
O'Connor, Mr. J. [Wicklow, W.]
Bolton Post Office Employees' Grievances, Mar. 18, 236.
Keighley Sunday Letter Deliveries, Mar. 25, 1105.
"Parliamentary Debates";Delay in Publication, Mar. 18, 238.
Peterhead and Holyhead Harbours;Grants, Mar. 25, 1102.
Shillelagh Union
Charges Against Dr. Bolster, Inquiry by Dr. Flinn, etc., Mar. 21, 730.
Charges Against Nurse Joyce, Names of Witnesses, etc., Mar. 15, 92; Mar. 18, 252.
Trawling;Employment of Gunboats, Mar. 25, 1123.
O'Connor, Mr. T. P. [Liverpool, Scotland]
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be Criticised in his Capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1232.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, Mar. 21, 763.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report;Attempting another Plantation of Ulster, etc., Mar. 19, 470; Mar. 25, 1172.
O'Doherty, Mr. W. [Donegal, N.]
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Act, 1899;Section 17, Mar. 26, 1371.
Bunagee Pier, Erection of, Mar. 26, 1372.
Constabulary, Royal Irish;Return, Mar. 23, 994; Mar. 25, 1118.
Donegal, Fisheries
Boatslip at Araheera, Mar. 22, 873.
Salmon Nets, Purchase of, Mar. 26, 1368, 1369.
Dublin Custom House Examinations, Mar. 26, 1117, 1118.
Glencolumbkille Ex-Sub-Postmaster;Date of Dismissal, etc, Mar. 25, 1120, 1121, 1122.
"Granuaille";Congested Districts Board's Steamer, Annual Repairs, Mar. 25, 1109.
Great Northern Railway Company;Strabane Merchants' Complaint, Mar. 23, 992, 993.
Innishowen Coast;Harbour Accommodation, Proposed Grants, Mar. 22, 868, 869.
Kinnagoe Bay, Moville;Lauding Accommodation Improvement, Mar. 26, 1370.
Limavady Water Supply, Mar. 22, 869.
Lough Foyle;Salmon Fishery Licences, Mar. 26, 1369.
Moville Police;Appointment of Roman Catholic Sergeant, Mar. 25, 1108.
Navy
Colonial Contribution towards Naval Expenditure, Mar. 22, 949; Mar. 25, 1149.
Londonderry Shipbuilding Industry;Admiralty Contracts, etc., Mar. 22, 950; Mar. 26, 1383.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Position of, Mar. 21, 758.
Training Ship for Lough Swilly, Protection against Trawling, etc., Mar. 25, 1149.
O'Brien, Mr. K.;Removal of from Commission of the Peace, Mar. 25, 1116.
Peat;Use of compressed Peat for raising Steam for Machinery and Ships, Mar. 25, 1218.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1240.
Questions
Absence of Ministers, Mar. 27, 1440.
Wednesday and Saturday Sittings, Mar. 23, 995.
Stationery used in Government Offices, Place or Manufacture, Mar. 25, 1217.
Ulster Winter Assizes, Mar. 25, 1107, 1108.
O'Donnell, Mr. J. [Mayo, S.]
Mark IV. Ammunition;Breaking up Bullets, Mar. 26, 1354.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1238.
Westport Petty Sessions
Contempt of Court, Case of Mrs. Salmon, Mar. 26, 1372, 1373.
Convictions against Scahill, Statements by Mr. Starkie, etc., Mar. 21, 735.
O'Donnell, Mr. T. [Kerry, W.]
Congested Districts;Return, Mar. 15, 89.
Irish Language in National Schools;Extra Subject Fees, etc., Mar. 25, 1118.
Irish Language;Delivery of Letters addressed in Irish, Mar. 25, 1119, 1120.
Irish-speaking Postmasters, Appointment of, etc., Mar. 18, 253.
Kerry Assizes;Jury challenging, Mar. 18, 244.
National Education Office;Vacancies for Clerks, Mar. 19, 417.
National School Teachers
Disablement Allowances, Mar. 22, 857.
Holidays, Curtailment of, Mar. 19, 410.
Salaries, Mar. 19, 415.
O'Dowd, Mr. J. [Sligo, S.]
Landed Estates Court;Sale of Estates, Mar. 26, 1376.
O'Brien. Mr. K.;Removal of, from Commission of the Peace, Mar. 25, 1116.
Roman Catholic, Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, Mar. 21, 743, 751.
Sligo Co.;Congested Districts, Mar. 25, 1113.
O'Kelly, Mr. C. [Mayo, N.]
Queen Victoria's Funeral;Day of General Mourning, Publicans compelled by Police to close, etc., Mar. 18, 246.
Wallace, Inspector;Retention beyond Term of Office, Mar. 18, 246.
O'Kelly, Mr. J. [Roscommon, N.]
China;Anglo-German Agreement, Russian Occupation of Manchuria, Mar. 22, 853.
Old Age Pensions (No. 5) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 20, 632.
Omagh
Cemetery;Delay in Payment of Loan, Closing Drumragh Burial Ground, etc.
Q. Mr. Murnaghan; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar. 15, 90.
O'Malley, Mr. J.
Queen Victoria's Funeral;Publicans Compelled by Police to Close, Alleged
Q. Mr. O'Kelly; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar 18, 246.
O'Malley. Mr. W. [Galway, Connemara]
Galway Co.;Congested District Board's Work, Mar. 18, 247.
O'Mara, Mr. J. [Kilkenny, S.]
Army;Training, Guns, Enormous Supplementary Estimates, etc., Mar. 21, 824.
Ashanti Rising;Military Operations, etc., Mar. 19, 449.
Dairy Industries, Ireland;Legislation, Proposed, Mar. 15, 88.
Horses;System of Purchase;Loss of Horses in South Africa, etc., Mar. 15, 187.
Labourers' Cottages, Occupiers of, and Membership of Public'Boards;Resignation of J. Magee, Mar. 15, 101.
South African War;Colonial Loyalty, Pay of Colonial Troops, etc., Mar. 21, 822.
Thomastown
Petty Sessions District;Number of Protestant Magistrates, Mar. 15, 93.
Sanitation;Local Government Board Inspectors, etc., Mar. 15, 93.
Orange River Colony
Financial Condition;Sir D. Barbour's Report, Value of Beewaarplaatzen, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Dermott; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1349.
Repatriation of Refugee Families at the Expense of H.M. Government
Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Mr. J. Chamber lain, Mar. 5, 1087.
Ordnance Factories
Vote for, Mar. 15, 187.
Ormond, Lower
Electoral Divisions;Transfer to Borrisokane Union, Delay, etc.
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 244.
Orr-Ewing, Mr. C. L. [Ayr Burghs]
South African War;Warm Clothing for Returning Troops, Mar. 19, 398.
O'Shaughnessy, Mr. P. J. [Limerick, W.]
Potatoes, Electro - Culture of, Mar. 21, 731.
Rural District Councils and Labourers' Cottages;Proposed Extension of Powers, Mar. 18, 247.
Sale of Estates in Ireland, Mar. 21, 731.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children, Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 602.
O'Shee, Mr. J. J. [Waterford, W.]
China;Tientsin, Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 21, 704.
Horses, Purchase of, for the Army, Mar. 15, 193.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign A Hairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 904.
Navy;Trawling, Protection of Irish Fisheries;Submarine Boats;Roman Catholic Chaplains, etc., Mar. 23, 1053.
South African Hospitals Commission;Partial and Imperfect Inquiry, Mar. 19, 542.
Tallow Conspiracy Case;Number of Jurors ordered to stand aside, Mar. 18, 249.
Over, G. H.
Under Age Recruit
Q. Col. Brookfield; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 700.
Oxford, Bishop of
Took the Oath, Mar. 31, 633.
P
Paardeberg
see South African War.
Paisley Gas Provisional Order Bill
c. R.* Mar. 18, 217.
Palmer, Sir P.
Commander-in-Chief in Tndia;Term of Appointment, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1091.
Papers of a Department of State
Objections to producing Confidential Documents
Debate (Lords), Mar. 15, 21, 24, 31, 32, 36, 41, 42, 43.
Parker, Mr. G. [Gravesend]
Canadian Horses, Purehase of, Mar. 19, 399; Mar. 25, 1089.
Naval Shipwrights' Rating, Mar. 25, 1095.
Parliament
Committees, see that title.
Easter Recess;Shortening proposed
Qs. Mr. S. Smith, Sir C. Dilke; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1384.
House of Commons
Accommodation;Select Committee
Nominated, Mar. 26, 1436.
Balloting for Motions on Tuesdays;Private Members' Rights, etc.
Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 741.
Business of the House, see that title.
Members;Queen Victoria's Funeral, Accommodation for Members to View
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 35, 1205.
Procedure;Supply Procedure, sec title Supply.
Questions, see that title.
Speaker's Rulings, see Speaker.
Speeches;Time limit proposed
Qs. Mr. Renwick, Major Rasch; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 22, 880.
Standing Orders, see. that title.
House of Lords
Parliamentary Papers, Delay in Delivery
Os. Lord Tweedmouth, Duke of Devonshire, Mar. 22, 842.
Reading Clerk and Clerk of Outdoor Committees;Appointment of Mr. E. H. Alderson
Motion (Earl of Halsbury), Mar. 15, 3.
Sat First in Parliament
Esher, Vise., after the death of his father, Mar. 25, 1061.
Ramsey, Lord, after the death of his father, Mar. 15, 1.
Took the Oath
Alderley, Lord Stanley of, Mar. 18, 197.
Byron, Lord, Mar. 15, 1061.
Oxford, Bishop of, Mar. 21, 633.
Ministerial Statements, see that title.
Opening;State Opening, Insufficient Accommodation for Members, etc.;Joint Committee of Inquiry
Message from the Commons, Mar. 15, 3.
Commons Message considered by the Lords, Mar. 18, 213.
Members nominated, etc., Mar. 26, 1436.
Representative Peers for Ireland, see that title.
Parliamentary Constituencies
Number of Electors, Population and Inhabited Houses in each Constituency;Return, Mar. 15, 58.
Parliamentary Debates
Delay in Publication
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 238; O. Mr. H. Lewis, Mar. 25, 1203.
Parliamentary Elections
Maidstone, see that title.
Return
Q. Mr. Kimber; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 15, 104.
Parliamentary Franchise
Extension to Women;Petitions, Mar. 15 57; Mar. 19, 392; Mar. 20, 558; Mar. 21, 692; Mar. 23, 989; Mar. 26, 1347.
Parliamentary Papers
Delay in Delivery to Members of the House of Lords
Os. Lord Tweedmouth, Duke of Devonshire, Mar.22, 842.
Patent Acts
Committee's Report
Qs. Sir J. Lens, Mr. Stuart-Wortley; As. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 854.
Evidence, Appendices, etc., Presented, Mar. 22, 833, 846.
Patents
Brussels Conference;Papers relating to, Laying on the table
Q. Mr. Stuart-Wortley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 854.
Pauper Children
Vaccination;Officials appointed by Board of Guardians, etc.
Q. Mr. Goddard; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 717.
Pauper Graveyard
Belfast;Area, Sanitary Condition, etc.
Q. Mr. T. M. Healy; A. Mr. Wyndbam, Mar. 15, 89.
Peace Negotiations
see South African War.
Peat
Use of compressed Peat for Raising Steam for Machinery and Ships
O. Mr. O'Doherty, Mar. 25, 1218.
Peel, Mr. W. E. W. [Manchester, S.]
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1333.
Pemba
Slavery
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19. 470.
Emancipation of Slaves, Facilitating efc.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Vise Cranborne, Mar. 25, 1099.
Number of Slaves freed 1898&#x2013;1900, etc.
Q. Mr. T. Bayley; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 223.
Penn, Mr. J. [Lewisham]
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 49.
Navy;Delay in Naval Shipbuilding, Water-tube Boilers, etc., Mar. 23, 1001.
Pensions
see Army and South African War.
Peterhead Harbour
Government Grants
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. G Balfour, Mar. 25, 1102.
Vote for, Mar. 25, 1128.
Peterhead and Holyhead Harbours
Government
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1102.
Petitions
Public Petitions Committee Report, Mar. 27, 1508.
Petty Sessions, Courts of
Summary Jurisdiction;Amendment of Law, Proposed
Q. Sir J. Rankin; A. Mr. J. Collings, Mar. 22, 856.
Philipps, Mr. J. W. [Pembroke]
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 894.
Ph&#x0153;nix Park
Dublin;use of, for Military Purposes, Extending Area, etc.
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 90.
Piccadilly
Widening
Q. Col. Legge; A. Mr. A. Douglas, Mar. 18, 234.
Pierpoint, Mr. R. [Warrington]
Army Examinations, French Syntax, Mar. 25, 1092.
St. John Ambulance Brigade in South Africa;Pensions, Mar. 25, 1089.
Piers and Harbours
Avoch Harbour, see that title
Ireland
Bunagee Pier, Erection of;Site, Cost. etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1372.
Greystones Pier and Harbour;Defective Works, County Surveyor's Report, etc.
Q. Mr. Cogan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 96.
Innishowen Coast, Harbour Accommodation;Proposed grant
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 868.
Monuments of the Incompetence of the Board of Works, etc.
O. Mr. Field, Mar. 25, 1255.
Sneem Pier;Goods Store, Erection of, Opposition of Landlord, etc.
Q. Mr. Poland; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 725.
Pilkington, Colonel R. [Lancashire, Newton]
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21. 680.
Pirbright
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1280.
Pirie, Mr. D. V. [Aberdeen, N.]
Armv;Reserve of Officers, Requiring Officers to serve with Provisional Regiments, Mar. 26, 1352.
China;Looting' at Peking, Mar. 26, 1358.
Education;Attendance at Schools, Halftimers, etc., Mar. 25, 1107.
Gibraltar, Cuby's Bank, Failure of;Regimental Losses, Mar. 25, 1092.
King's Title in Scotland, Mar. 18, 240.
South African War;Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals, Mar. 22, 848; Mar. 25, 1084.
Plague
Cape Colony, see that title.
Southampton;Reported Case, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 23, 993.
Platt-Higgins, Mr. F. [Salford, N.]
Navy;Position of the Engineering Branch of the Navy, etc., Mar. 23, 1005.
Savings Banks and Friendly Society Deficiencies, Mar. 25, 1202.
Poet Laureateship
Abolition proposed
Q. Mr. Edwards; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1385.
Police
Constabulary, Royal Irish, see that title.
Salisbury Plain, Military Camp;Police Arrangements
Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1353.
Police Superannuation (Scotland) Bill
Petition, Mar. 20, 559.
Reports and Minutes of Evidence of Session 1890 to be referred to Select Committee, Mar. 18, 219.
Political Prisoners
Irelan d;Amnesty
Q. Mr. Delaney; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 231.
Polling Arrangements (Parliamentary-Boroughs) Bill
l. 1R.* Mar. 21, 639.
Polling Districts (County Councils) Bill
l. 1R.* Mar. 21, 639.
Pontefract
Locomotive Explosion
Q. Mr. Bell; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 79.
Pontypool
Telephone Exchange Area;Transfer of Abergavenny District
Q. Mr. M'Kenna; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 238.
Poor Law
Medical Relief and the Franchise
Q. Mr. H. J. Wilson; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 717.
Poor Law Medical Officers
Ireland;Local Government Board Officials compelling Boards of Guardians to give Month's Holiday, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 727.
Poor Law Officers' Superannuation Act
Petitions for Alteration of Law, Mar. 15, 57; Mar. 18, 217; Mar. 19. 392; Mar. 20, 559; Mar. 21, 692; Mar. 22, 845.
Poor Law Superannuation (Ireland) Bill
Charge on Local Rates, Ascertaining, etc.
Qs. Mr. Murnaghan, Mr. Daly; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 417.
Pope
see Vatican.
Pork and Bacon
Naval Contracts;Expenditure in Ireland
Qs. Mr. Joyce, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 26. 1382.
Portadown Disturbances
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1246.
Qs. Mr. Clancy; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 251; Mar. 21, 736; Mar. 26, 1377.
Portsmouth, Earl of
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration. Against;Joint Com. of both Houses, Mar. 19, 375.
Portumna
Madden, T., Retired Postman;Pension Claim
Q. Mr. Roche; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 875.
Post Office
Postmaster General;Marquess of Londonderry.
Representative in House of Commons;Mr. Austen Chamberlain.
Employees
Bolton;Grievances
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 236.
Careless, Mr., Dismissal of;Refusal to Prosecute, etc.
Qs. Mr. Bartley, Mr. G. Bowles; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain Mar. 15, 84
Irish Questions
Ballybofey Sub - Postmastership;Appointment. Salary, etc.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr A. Chamberlain, Mar. 23, 994.
Cahir;Providing Suitable Premises
Q. Mr. Cullinan; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1122.
Down, Co., Postal Arrangements;English and Scotch Letters, Delays, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 874.
Dublin, see that title.
Enniskillen;Date of opening new building, etc.
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 876.
Eyeries;Sunday Delivery proposed
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1381.
Glencolumbkille Ex-Sub-Postmaster, Date of Dismissal;Appointment of Sergeant of Royal Irish Constabulary
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1120.
Irish Language;Delivery of Letters addressed in Irish
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1119.
Irish-speaking Postmasters, Appointment of, etc.
Q. Mr. T. O'Donnell; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 253.
Knockbrack Sub-Post Office;Re-opening.
Q. Mr. M'Fadden; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1119.
Portumna;T. Madden, Retired Postman, Pension Claim
Q. Mr. Roche; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 875.
Schull Letter Carrier, Mr. Dempsey;Wages
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1381.
Keighley Sunday Letter Deliveries;Undelivered Letters
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1105.
Mail Service, see that title.
Private Postal Packets Collection;Mr. Graves's Agitation
Q. Mr. K. Hardie; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1366.
Radwinter and Hempstead Postal Arrangements;Second Delivery proposed
Q. Mr. A. Wodehouse; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 237.
Telegraph Service, see that title.
Telephone Service, see that title.
Twine Contracts
Q. Mr. Keir Hardie; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 81.
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Postmaster-General
Marquess of Londonderry.
Potato Cultivation, Ireland
Electro-Culture;Result of Investigations
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 731.
Poultry-Breeding
Highlands;Distributing free Sittings of Eggs in Congested Areas, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray Mar. 22, 862.
Power, Mr. P. J. [Waterford, E.]
Irish Fisheries, Protection of, by Gunboats, Mar. 23, 1049.
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 902.
Navy
Colonial Contributions, Mar. 25, 1147.
Gunnery Practice;Providing float Slip at Tramore, etc., Mar. 23,1018.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Mar. 21, 757.
Supply;Discussion on Supplementary Estimates, Mar. 25, 1224.
Trawling;Protection of Fisheries by Gunboats, Mar. 23, 1017.
Press
Convicted Prisoners Communicating with the Press;Case of Bennett
Q. Mr. Allhusen; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 19, 408.
Prestatyn Water Bill
Witnesses Ordered to attend Select Committee, Mar. 15, 1.
Pretyman, Mr. E. G.;Civil Lord of the Admiralty [Suffolk, Woodbridge]
Greenwich Hospital and Travers Foundation;Annual Reports, Mar. 15, 70.
Prevention of Corruption Bill
l. 1R.* Mar. 22, 834.
Prime Minister
Marquess of Salisbury.
Office of Lord Privy Seal;Lord Salisbury holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be criticised in his capacity as Prime Minister
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1233.
Prisoners
Irish Political Prisoners;Amnesty
Q. Mr. Delany; A. Mr. Richie, Mar. 18, 231.
see also Names of Prisoners.
Letters to the Press;Convict Bennett
Q. Mr. Allhusen; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 19, 408.
Prisons (Scotland) Bill
l. 2R. Mar. 19, 366.
Prisons (Scotland) Bill
Debate on Second Reading, Mar. 19, 366.
Accommodation;Inadequate Accommodation, 368.
Classification of Prisoners, 369.
Corporal Punishment, 367.
Dangerous Disease, Prisoners affected with;Treatment in ordinary Infirmary, 368.
Deaths in Prison;Inquiry, 369.
Duties of Governor, Portion to lie carried out by Medical Superintendent, 368.
Remission of Sentence of ordinary Hard Labour Prisoners, 368.
Sentence, Month to be Calendar Month, 368.
Visiting Committees, 367.
Private Bills
Group A
Witnesses ordered to attend, Mar. 27, 1439.
Group D
Witnesses ordered to attend, Mar. 27, 1440.
Private Legislation Procedure (Scot land) Act, 1899
General Orders in respect of Provisional Orders not complied with;Report, Mar. 15, 3157.
Local Inquiries;Fixing Places for Inquiries, etc.
Q. Earl of Glasgow; A. Lord Balfour of Burleigh, Mar. 21, 636.
Orders relating to sending Bills to the House of Lords, etc., Mar. 21, 635.
Parliamentary Panel of Members to act as Commissioners;Appointment of Mr. Baird in place of Sir C. Dalrymple, Mar. 19, 391.
Proceedings under, etc.;Amending General Order, Presented, Mar. 27, 1439.
Privy Seal
Marquess of Salisbury.
Office of, Revival of Salary;Prime Minister Holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes, so that he could be Criticised in his Capacity as Prime Minister, Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1233.
Salaries and Expenses of the Office;Vote for, Mar. 25, 1227.
"Protector"
Placing at the Disposal of His Majesty's Government
O. Mr. E. Robertson, Mar. 21, 776, 782.
Provident Funds
Wallasey Improvement Bill Debate, Mar. 21, 673.
Pryce-Jones, Col. E. [Montgomery Boroughs]
Ministerial Statements on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 909.
Public Libraries Bill
l. 2R. Mar. 18, 211.
Com., Mar. 25, 1063.
Purvis, Mr. R. [Peterborough]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1441.
Q
Queen Victoria
Funeral
Day of General Mourning;Irish Shopkeepers and Publicans compelled to close, see Ireland.
Funeral Procession;Members' Stand, etc.
Debate in Committee of Supply, Mar. 25, 1205.
Scotch Volunteers
Accommodation and Food Provided for
Q. Mr. Weir; A Lord Stanley, Mar. 25,1904.
Cost, Details of
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1095.
Number Attending, Travelling Expenses, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19, 400.
Treatment of, on Arrival in London
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 18, 224.
Vote for Funeral Expenses, Mar. 18, 838; Mar. 19, 428.
Indian Memorial;Amount Subscribed, etc.
Q. Mr. Caine; A. Lord G. Hamilton, Mar. 15, 75.
Mourning Stationery
O. Mr. K. Hardie, Mar. 25, 1204.
Queen's Colleges
Cork, Belfast, and Galway;Cost, etc.
Q. Mr. Roche: A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 246.
Queen's Stores, Dublin
Sale to Shipping Company, etc.
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 249.
Questions in the House
Absence of Ministers (Wednesday Sitting)
Os. Mr. O'Doherty, Mr. Speaker, Mr. J. Lowther, Mr. Flavin, Mar. 27, 1440.
Members Asking not more than One Question a Day, Proposed
Q. Mr. Renwick; A. Mr. A. J. Hal-four, Mar. 22, 880.
Printing Replies and Circulating among Members, etc.
Q. Mr. Markham; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 15, 105.
Wednesday and Saturday Sittings;Practice as to Questions
Os. Mr. J. Redmond, Mr. O'Doherty, Mar. 23, 994.
Quilter, Sir C [Suffolk, Sudbury]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1664.
R
Radwinter
Postal Arrangements;Second Delivery proposed
Q. Mr. A. Wodehouse; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 237.
Raglan, Lord;Under Secretary of Stale for War
Army
Officers, Instruction for -Duke of Bedford's Proposals, Mar. 19, 385.
Pensions for Disabled Soldiers, Mar. 25, 1078,1079.
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Mar. 26, 1273.
Railway Bills
Group I;Witnesses Ordered to attend Committee, Mar. 21, 691.
Group 2;Report from Com., Mar. 25, 1080.
Railways
Bye-laws, New Code of
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 77.
Companies, see their Names.
Foreign Countries, see their Names.
Irish Questions
Armagh to Kingscourt Railway;Sale of Rights to Great Northern Railway Company
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 711.
Closed Railway Gates
Q. Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 18, 252.
Great Northern Hail way Company;Strabane Merchants' Com plaint, Delay in bringing to Trial
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 23, 992.
Guarantees;Ratepayers deducting half the amount payable, etc.
Q. Mr. Condon; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 22, 873.
Killarney;Inequality of Railway Rates, Complaints, etc.
Q. Mr. Murphy; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 101.
"Worst Railways in the World," Highest Rates, etc.
Os. Mr. Field, Mar. 25,1255; Mr. Wyndham, 1257.
Ludgate Hill and Snow Hill Railway Stations, see those titles.
Pontefract Locomotive Explosion, see Pontefract.
Rates, Preferential Rates for Foreign Produce;Great Eastern Railway Company
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 19, 410; Q. Major Rasch; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 854.
Scotland
Highland Railways;Mixed Trains
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 709.
Light Railways, sec title Highlands and Islands.
Mallaig Railway;Delay in Opening
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 855.
Rainham
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1280.
Ramsey, Lord
Sat first in Parliament after the death of his father, Mar. 15, 1.
Randles, Mr. J. S. [Cumberland, Cocker-mouth]
Army;Civilian Doctors and Veterinary Surgeons at Home Stations;Rate of Pay, Mar. 15, 63.
Rankin, Sir J. [Herefordshire, Leominster]
Courts of Petty Sessions;Summary Jurisdiction, Mar. 22, 856.
Horticulture;Experiment Stations proposed, Mar. 22, 855.
Rasch, Major F. C [Essex, Chelmsford]
Army;Royal Reserve Regiments, Total Strength on Mar. 1, etc., Mar. 25, 1089.
Great Eastern Railway Goods Rates, Mar. 22, 854, 855.
Income Tax;Exemption of Officers in South Africa, Mar. 26, 1360.
Speeches in Parliament;Proposed Time Limit, Mar. 22, 881.
Rates
Ireland, see that title.
Reading Clerk
see Parliament;House of Lords.
Reay, Lord
Indian Native Publications;Charge of Sedition against Mr. Malabari, Mar. 22, 839.
Recruits
see Army.
Reddy, Mr. M. [King's County, Birr]
Administration of Justice, Ireland;Charges against Executive, etc., Mar.25, 1253.
Army Pensions;Case of P. Guinan, Mar. 19, 402.
Birr, Labourers' Cottages at;Rejection of Applications, etc., Mar. 15, 88.
Redmond, Mr. J. [Waterford]
Board of Works, Ireland;New Chairman, Mar. 21, 740.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R, Mar. 26, 1433.
Finnigan, P., and Constable Muldowney, Proposed Remission of Sentence, Mar. 18, 243.
Navy Estimates Discussion, Mar. 23,1011.
Balfour's, Mr., Appeal to go into Committee, Mar. 22, 971.
General Discussion on Vote A, continuing Discussion on Vote I, Mar. 23, 1025, 1028, 1030.
Piers and Harbours;Raising Question on Navy Estimates, Mar. 23, 1046.
Questions in the House, Wednesday and Saturday Sittings, Mar. 23, 994, 995.
Supply
Closure of Discussion, Mar. 19, 553.
Procedure;Alteration in Form of presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18, 258, 259, 262, 265, 281.
Ways and Means;Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, Resolution, Mar. 23, 1059, 1060.
Redmond, Mr. W. H. K. [Clare, E.]
Army
Estimates, Increase in Military Expenditure, etc., Mar. 21, 815.
Pay of the Army in South Africa;Comparisons with Colonial Pay, Mar. 15, 161.
Ashanti Rising, Causes of the Rising, Policy of the Military Expedition, etc., Mar. 19, 433.
Australia, Recruiting for the South African Constabulary, Total Cost of Australian Contingents in South Africa, etc., Mar. 21, 827.
China;Anti-Foreign Rising
Anglo-German Agreement;Applying to Manchuria, Mar. 19, 405; Mar. 22, 853; Mar. 25, 1097, 1098.
Manchuria;Russo-Chinese Agreement, Attitude of Japan, Mar. 19, 405.
Tien-tsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 15, 73; Mar. 18, 228; Mar. 21. 703.
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 15, 102.
Coinage;New Coinage, Royal Titles, Retention of "Defender of the Faith," Mar. 18, 229.
Cornwall and York's, Duke and Duchess of, Visit the Colonies;Travelling Expenses, etc., Mar. 25, 1210.
Diplomatic and Consular Services;Expenditure, Mar. 25, 1209.
Distinguished Service Order;Additional Sum for the Lord Chamberlain's Department, Mar. 25, 1210.
Foreign Office Telegrams, Increase in Cost, Mar. 25, 1227, 1229.
Gunboats for the Protection of Fisheries in Irish Waters, Mar. 21, 810.
Halpin, Mr., Case of;Abandoning Proceedings Against, etc., Mar. 19, 419.
Killydysart District Council;Account due to Mr. M'Inerney, Action of Local Government Board, Mar. 25, 1112.
Legitimist Jacobite League;Decoration of King Charles I.'s Statue on Jan. 30, 1901, prohibited, etc., Mar. 22, 858.
Lunatic Asylums, Rates-in-Aid, Mar. 26, 1380.
Limerick Lunatic Asylum, Mar. 22, 864.
Ministerial Statements in the House of Lords;Communicating to the House of Commons, Mar. 21, 705; Mar. 22, 880, 911.
Navy
Estimates, Closure, etc., Mar. 23, 1020, 1031.
Expenditure
Colonial Contributions, Mar. 21, 809.
Expenditure in Ireland, Mar. 26. 1381, 1382, 1383.
Increase in Estimates, etc., Mar. 23, 1131.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Position of, Mar. 21, 753.
Privy Seal, Office of;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, Placing Salary on the Votes so that he could be Criticised in his Capacity as Prime Minister, Mar. 25, 1235.
Queen Victoria, Funeral of;Day of General Mourning, Publicans Compelled by Police to Close, etc., Mar. 13, 247.
Roman Catholicism, Royal Declaration against;Appointment of Committee. Mar. 21, 741.
Somaliland Military Operations, Mar. 19, 501.
South African War;Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals, Mar. 19, 397; Mar. 22, 848; Mar. 25, 1086.
Stationery and Printing Expenditure, Mar. 25, 1209.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in Form of presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18, 296; Mar. 25, 1211, 1213.
Trawling;Employment of Gunboats, Mar. 25, 1123, 1131.
Western Australia and Irish Home Rule, Mar. 22, 877.
Reformatory and Industrial Schools
Ireland;Lord Lieutenant's Order, etc.
Os. Mr. Field, Mar. 25, 1256: Mr. Wyndham, 1256.
Registration of Clubs Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 19, 427.
Registration of Firms Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 22, 929.
Reid, Samuel
Absent Juryman at Kilmarnock Sheriff Court
Q. Mr. Cochrane; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 413.
Reid, Sir R [Dumfries Burghs]
Supply Procedure;Alteration in Form of presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating and putting as lump sum from the Chair, Mar. 18, 274.
Renwick, Mr. G. [Newcastle-on-Tyne]
German Guns, Purchase of;Defects Mar. 15, 63.
Questions in the House, Proposed Limitation;Time Limit for Speeches, etc., Mar. 22, 880.
Reports of Royal Commissions
South African Land Settlement Commission;Withholding Report from the House, etc.
O. Sir W. Harcourt, Mar. 25, 1167.
Representative Peers for Ireland
Henley, Baron, Mar. 18, 197: Mar. 26, 1265.
"Resolution," H.M.S.
Berehaven Accident
O. Mr. Gilhooly, Mar. 23, 1043.
Revenue Departments Estimates
see Supply.
Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom
Contributions to the Revenue, Expenditure on Services met out of such Revenue in the three Kingdoms, etc.;Return Mar. 19, 395; Mar. 21, 694.
Rhodesia
Native Labour, Importation of Natives;Disturbances at Salisbury, Beira, etc.
Q. Mr. T. Bayley; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 70.
Richmond Gas Bill
c 2R.* Mar. 18, 216.
Rifle Ranges
Provision of Rifle Ranges
Debate on Estimates, Mar. 15, 181.
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1267.
Ritchie, Rt. Hon. C. T.;Secretary of State for the Home Department [Croydon]
Child Drunkenness;Number of Arrests, Mar. 19, 407.
Factory and Workshops Act Amendment Bill;Date of Introduction, Mar. 15, 17.
Inebriate Homes Number of Persons Committed, Mar. 18, 230.
Lead Poisoning
New Rules;Thorpe, Dr., and Dr. Oliver, Reports, Mar. 15, 77.
Number of Cases 1899 and 1900, Return, Mar. 18, 231.
Licensing Legislation, Mar. 19, 407.
Magistrates and the Oath of Allegiance, Mar. 18, 230; Mar. 19, 408.
Merthyr Tydvil Stipendiary Magistrate and Local Justices;Correspondence between, Mar. 25, 1101.
Prisoners
Irish Political Prisoners;Amnesty, Mar. 18, 232.
Letters to the Press, Mar. 19, 409.
Vaccination;Bradford, Arrest of W. Mottershead, Mar. 18, 231.
Vehicular Traffic in the Metropolis;Hooded Vans, Mar. 18, 232.
Roads
Ireland, Length Limits;Local Government Order
Q. Mr. K. O'Brien; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 15, 100.
Scotland;Construction of Roads
Applecross Cart Road
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 18, 239.
Congested Areas m the Highlands
Qs. Mr. Weir; As. Mr. A. G. Murray Mar. 18, 241; Mar. 19, 415.
Lewis, Island of, see that title.
Mull, Island of
Q. Mr. Nicol; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 413.
Tramway Construction;Amendment to Standing Order, see Standing Order.
Roberts, Mr. H. [Denbighshire, W.]
India;Military Outposts beyond the Frontier, etc., Mar. 15, 74.
Vale of Clwyd Postal Service, Mar. 15, 82.
Robertson, Mr. E. [Dundee]
Army;Reform and Reorganisation, Government Proposals, Financial Effect of Proposals, etc., Mar. 15, 171.
Australasia
Flotilla in Australian Waters;Disappearance of Vote 16 from the Navy Estimates, Mar. 21, 775.
Ship "Protector" lent to H.M. Government, Mar. 21, 776.
China;Looting, General Gaselee's Despatches, etc., Mar. 25, 1099.
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 15, 102.
Coaling Stations, Garrisoning with the Marines, Proposal, Mar. 21, 774.
Defences of the Empire;Colonial Contributions towards the Navy Mar. 21, 782.
Dublin Castle Authorities;Overriding of the Law, Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 122.
Gibraltar Docks and Defences;Inquiry, etc., Mar. 21, 774.
Ministerial Statements in the House of Lords;Communicating to the House of Commons, Mar. 22, 879.
Navy
Boilers;Watertube Boilers, Belleville Type, etc., Report of Boiler Committe, etc., Mar. 21, 767.
Expenditure;"Colossal" Expenditure, Mar. 21, 777.
Fleets;Comparative Statement as to the Strength of the Active List of the Navies of the World, Mar. 25, 1131.
Merchant Cruisers, Mar. 21, 776; Mar. 22, 978.
Submarine Boats, Decision of the Admiralty to experiment with, Mar. 21, 772.
Navy Estimates, Discussion on;General Discussion on Vote A, continuing discussion on Vote I, Mar. 23, 1025, 1027, 1030.
Sittings of the House, Saturday Sitting;Business of Supply, Mar. 22, 928.
Supply Procedure;Alteration in form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates, Consolidating Votes, etc., Mar. 18, 260.
"Victoria and Albert," New Royal Yacht, Expenditure on, Mar. 21, 776.
Robson, Mr. W. S. [South Shields]
Ministerial Statement on Critical Situations in Foreign Affairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 906.
Roche, Mr. J. [Galway, E.]
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 18, 256.
Madden, T.;Retired Postman at Portumna, Pension Claim, Mar. 22, 875, 876.
Queen's Colleges;Cost, etc., Mar. 18, 246.
Rollit, Sir A. K. [Islington, S.]
Savings Banks and Friendly Society Deficiencies, Mar. 25, 1199.
Roman Catholic Chaplains
sec Navy.
Roman Catholic University
see Ireland;University Education.
Roman Catholicism
Royal Declaration Against
Committee, Appointment of
Qs. Mr. Delany, Mr. W. Johnston; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 255; Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 741.
Coronation Oath
Q. Mr. W. Abraham; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 19, 421.
Joint Committee of both Houses to inquire into Statute, etc.
Motions (Lord Herries), Mar. 19, 369; (Marquess of Salisbury), Mar. 21, 671.
Message from the Lords, Mar. 22, 881.
Protests of Public Bodies;Laying on the Table
Q. Mr. P. O'Brien; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 255.
Rosebery, Earl of
South African War;Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War, Mar. 18, 210.
War Office Administration, Lord Wolseley's indictment of the system introduced in 1895, Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, etc.,Mar. 15, 17, 32, 34, 37, 42.
Roxboro' Road School
see Limerick.
Royal Commissions
see Commissions.
Royal Irish Constabulary
see Constabulary, Royal Irish.
Royal Reserve Regiments
see Army.
Rugby
Rifle Ranges, Difficulties of obtaining Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1270.
Runnymead
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation, Debates (Lords), Mar. 26, 1280.
Rural District Councils, Ireland
Accounts Audits;Fees
Q. Mr. Kennedy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 734.
Labourers' Cottages;Proposed Extension of Powers
Q. Mr. O'Shaughnessy; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 247.
Russell, Mr. T. W. [Tyrone, S.]
Dublin Castle Authorities, Overriding of the Law;Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 98, 111, 117, 128.
Russia
China, see that title.
Naval Expenditure;Increase in Expenditure
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 778; Mar. 22, 953.
Sheffield Pile Trade with;Erection of Factories in Russia
Qs. Sir H. Vincent, Mr. J. Lowther; As. Mr. C. Balfour, Mar. 21, 712.
Rutherford, Mr. J. [Lancashire, Darwen]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar 27, 1502.
S
Sackville, Mr. Stopford [Northants, N.]
Army Officers' Half-pay and Retired pay declarations, Mar. 25, 1090.
St. John Ambulance Brigade
South African War;Pension for Widow of Private Maddocks
Q. Mr. Pierpoint; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1089.
St. Patrick's Day
Stewartstown;Proclamation of Meeting' etc.
Qs. Mr. Doogan, Mr. Flavin, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 95.
Wearing of Shamrock, see Shamrock.
"St. Vincent," H.M.S.
Influenza Outbreak
Q. Mr. E. Wason; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 15, 67.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors
Petitions for alteration of Law, Mar. 19 391; Mar. 20, 558.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors on Sunday Bill
Petitions, Mar. 19, 392; Mar. 20, 559; Mar. 23, 989; Mar. 26, 1347.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 20, 565.
Petitions, Mar. 15, 57; Mar. 18, 217; Mar. 19, 392; Mar. 20, 559; Mar. 21, 692; Mar. 22, 845; Mar. 23, 990,; Mar. 25, 1081; Mar. 26, 1347; Mar. 27,1438.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill.
Debate on Second Reading (Commons) Mar. 20, 565.
Adoptive principle suggested, 611, 613, 616.
Age Limit, 560, 592, 602, 604, 605, 610, 613, 620, 621, 622.
"Apparently" or "Knowingly";Use of Words, 593, 597, 609,610, 617, 623.
Intoxication among Children, 569,575, 591, 595, 614.
Liverpool, Action of Licensing Authority, 577, 593.
Messengers, Effect of Bill on Employment of, 566, 580, 588.
Parents or Senders, Penalising, 570, 578, 582, 586, 601, 603, 615.
Title of Bill;Meaning of "Sale," etc., 566, 567.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children (Scotland) Bill
Petitions, Mar. 15. 58; Mar. 18, 218;, Mar. 19, 394; Mar. 20, 564; Mar. 21 693; Mar. 22, 815; Mar. 23, 990; Mar. 25, 1081; Mar. 26,1347; Mar. 27, 1438.
Salisbury, Marquess of;Prime Minister, Lord Privy Seal
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 659.
Peace Negotiations between Com. Botha and Lord Kitchener, Mar. 19, 366.
Privy Seal Office;Prime Minister holding Dual Office, see Privy Seal.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Com. of both Houses, Mar. 19, 378; Mar. 21, 671.
South African War;Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War, Mar. 18, 207, 209,211.
War Office Administration, Lord Wolseley's indictment of the System introduced in 1895, Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 32, 37, 42, 43.
Salisbury Plain
Police Arrangements
Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1353.
Salmon Fisheries, Ireland
Donegal;Purchase of Salmon Nets, Proposed Loans by Congested District Board
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1368.
Lough Foyle;Fishery Licences
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1369.
Poisoning Spawning Grounds
Q. Mr. Carvill; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar. 15, 94.
Salmon, Mrs.
Case of;Number of Convictions in West-port Petty Sessions
Q. Mr. J. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1373.
Samuel, Mr H. S. [Tower Hamlets, Lime-house]
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1330.
Sandhurst, Lord
Indian Native Publications;Charge of Sedition against Mr. Malabari, Mar. 22, 840.
Royal Military College;Report of Board of Visitors, Mar. 21, 635, 694.
South African War;Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War, Mar. 18, 201.
Sassoon, Sir E. A. [Hythe]
India Currency Act;Gold Reserve, Mar. 22, 852.
Strathcona's Horse;Troopers wearing Ribbon of Medal pending issue of Medal, etc., Mar. 18, 222.
Saturday Sittings of the House
Business of Supply
Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), Mar. 22, 923;Amendment (Mr. Dillon), 925.
Saunderson, Col- Rt. Hon. E. J. [Armagh, N.]
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 620.
Savings Bank and Friendly Society Deficiencies
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1199.
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Scahill
Convictions against at Westport Petty Sessions;Statements by Mr. Starkie
Q. Mr. J. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 21, 735.
School Board Electorate (Scotland) Bill
c, 1R* Mar. 15, 128.
Schull
Letter Carrier;Wages
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1381
Schwann, Mr. C. E. [Manchester, N.]
Manchester Post Office Promotions, Telegraphist refunding Back Pay, etc., Mar. 21, 721.
South African War
Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals, Mar. 19, 396.
Pensions for Widows and Orphans of Soldiers;Government Scheme, Mar. 19, 397.
United States, Extradition Treaty with, Mar. 21, 708.
Science and Art
Heckmondwike School of Science;Charging Pees, etc.
Q. Mr. Yoxall; A.Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 25, 1102.
Scotland
Secretary;Rt. Hon. Lord Balfour of Burleigh.
Under Secretary;Sir C. Scott Moncrieff.
Lord Advocate;Rt. Hon. A. G. Murray.
Solicitor General;Mr. C. S. Dickson.
Aberdeen University;Abstract of Accounts, Copy Presented, Mar. 22. 846.
Applecross Cart Road, Construction of, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 18, 239.
Avoch Harbour, see that title.
Barra, Island of;Crofters and Cottars, Purchase of Land from Lady Gordon Cathcart
Q. Mr. J. Dewar; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1368.
Broad Bay, Trawling in;Lightkeepers at Tuimpan Lighthouse reporting Trawling
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 860.
Child Drunkenness;Number of Children arrested in 1900
Q. Mr. Flower; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 407.
Congested Districts Board, see that title.
Crofters and Cottars, see that title.
Cromarty Firth, Suitability for Naval Station;Fortification proposed
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1095.
Dingwall Barrack Accommodation, Inadequacy of, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 702.
Dunkeld Railway Facilities, Insufficiency of
Q. Mr. Stroyan; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1361.
Edinburgh, see that title.
Education;for collective heading, see that title.
Fife and Forfar Yeomanry in South Africa;Reduction in Numbers, Date of Return, etc.
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 62.
Foula, Island of, Illegal Trawling off;Prosecution
Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 861.
Greenock, see that title.
Highlands and Islands, see that title.
Hospitals;Difficulty of Securing Accommodation in the Highlands and Islands
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 15, 86.
Inver;Disfranchisement of Householders
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 21, 725.
Kessock Ferry;Conveyance of Mails as Passengers' Luggage
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 235.
Kilmarnock Sheriff Court;S. Reid, Absent Juryman
Q. Mr. Cochrane; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 19, 413.
King's Title;Summonses and other Documents running in the name of Edward VII.
Qs. Mr. Black, Mr. J. Dewar, Mr. Pirie; As. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 18, 240.
Lewis, Island of, see that title.
Light Railways in Highland Crofting Counties, see title Highlands and Islands.
Lights and Lighthouses;for collective heading, see that title.
Loch Carloway;Beacon, Erection of, on Tanasgeir
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1367.
Mallaig Railway;Delay in Opening, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 855.
Mull, Island of;Road Construction. Grants for Private Roads
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Mm ray, Mar. 19, 413.
Peterhead Harbour;Government Grant
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1102.
Poultry Breeding in the Highlands;Distributing Free Sittings of Eggs in Congested Areas, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 33, 862.
Private Bill Legislation Scotland Act, see that title.
Railways;for collective heading, see that title.
Revenue and Expenditure of the United Kingdom, see that title.
Roads, for collective heading see that title.
Sheriffs' salaries;Report of Committee
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 863.
Stornoway Mails;New Steamer Service between Mallaig and Stornoway
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 237.
Trawling, for collective heading see that title.
Volunteer Artillery;Rearming with 4&#x00B7;7 Guns.
Q. Mr. Nicol; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 702.
Volunteers at Queen's Funeral, see Queen Victoria, Funeral of.
Scotland, Secretary's Office
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Scott, Mr. C. P. [Lancashire, Leigh]
Ashanti Rising, Causes of, Policy of the Military Expedition, etc., Mar. 19. 430.
Seaforth Volunteers
Treatment of, on arrival in London for the Queen's Funeral
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 18, 224.
Seamen
Navy;Training of the Personnel of the Fleet, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 784; Mar. 22, 980.
Seeley, Mr. C H. [Lincoln]
Yeomanry;Marching Allowances, Mar. 22, 851.
Shamrock
Woolwich Military Academy;Cadets Wearing Shamrock on St. Patrick's Day
Q. Capt. Donelan; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1353.
Sheffield
File Trade;Erection of Factories in Russia, etc.
Qs. Sir H. Vincent, Mr. J. Lowther; As. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 712.
Graves, Mr., Private Postal Collection Agitation
Q. Mr. K. Hardie; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1366.
Sheffield District Railway Bill
l. Report,* Mar. 26, 1265.
Sheriffs, Scotland
Salaries;Report of Committee
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 863.
Shields
Telephone Charges between North and South Shields
Q. Mr. L. Harris; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 859.
Shillelagh Union
Bolster, Dr., Charges against;Inquiry by Dr. Flinn, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 730.
Joyce, Nurse, Charges against;Witnesses' Names
Qs. Mr. J. O'Connor; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 92; Mar. 18, 252.
Shipbuilding for the Navy
sec Navy.
Shipwrights
Naval Shipwright Ratings;Rate of Pay
Q. Mr. G. Parker; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1095.
Shoeburyness
Medical Arrangements for Officers
Q. Mr. Bartley; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 19, 401.
Silesia
South African AVar;British Army Enlistments in Silesia, alleged
Q. Mr. J. F. X. O'Brien; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1351.
Silver Coinage
India, see that title;Currency.
Sinclair, Capt. J. [Forfar]
Army Reform and Reorganisation Scheme;Protest against Increased Expenditure, etc.,
Mar. 15, 183.
Sites Values (London) Eating Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 19, 420.
Sittings of the House
Exemption from Standing Order;Business of Supply
Motions (Mr. A. J. Balfour), Mar. 19, 422; Mar. 22, 917.
Saturday Sittings;Business of Supply Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour), Mar. 22, 923;Amendment (Mr. Dillon), 925.
Slavery
Ashanti;Military Operations to put down Slavery, alleged
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 18, 345; Mar. 19, 434.
Zanzibar and Pemba, see those titles.
Sligo
Congested Districts;Number of Electoral Divisions Scheduled, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Dowd; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 25, 1113.
Small Holdings
Scotland, Crofting Counties;Enabling Parish Councils to acquire Land
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 26, 1366.
Smith, Mr. S. [Flintshire]
Army Chaplains and Lawless Ritualistic Societies, Mar. 15, 182.
Easter Recess, Shortening proposed, Mar. 26, 1384.
Sneem Pier
Erection of Goods Store;Opposition of Landlord, etc.
Q. Mr. Boland; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 725.
Snow Hill Railway Station
Dangerous Condition of
Os. Lord Monks well, Earl of Hardwicke, Mar. 21, 667.
Soane's Museum
Statemeut of Funds Presented, Mar. 25, 1062, 1082.
Soldier Settlers in South Africa
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1162.
Yeomanry Settlers;Assisting passage of Wives and Families
Q Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar 18, 219.
Solicitor General
Sir E. Carson.
Solicitor General for Scotland
Mr. C. Scott-Dickson.
Somaliland
Anglo-Abyssinian Expedition against the Mad Mullah
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19, 500.
Outbreak of Ogaden Somalis, Murder of Mr. Jenner, etc.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19, 484.
Punitive Expedition
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19, 479, 497.
Somerset
Duchy of Cornwall Coal Royalties;Amounts received from Lessees of Farrington Gurney Colliery, etc.
Q. Mr. Strachey; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 859.
South African Land Settlement Scheme
Commission, Report
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 849.
Withholding Report from the House, etc.
Debate in Com of Supply, Mar. 25, 1162.
Compulsory Confiscation of Boer Lands, Balfour's, Mr., Contradiction, Mar. 25, 1176.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1173.
Ulster Plantation in South Africa
Qs. Mr. T. P. O'Connor, Mar. 25 1172; Mr. J. Chamberlain, 1174.
South African Settlement
Merriman-Sauer Petition;Leave to be heard on the question of Future Policy in South Africa, Petition Presented, Mar. 25, 1081.
Reinforcing British Influence in South Africa
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1168.
Relief to Sufferers after the War;Charge upon the Republics, etc.
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. J. Chamberland, Mar. 15, 60.
Repatriation of South African Refugees
Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1087.
South. African War
Boer Prisoners, see sub-heading Prisoners.
Civil Surgeons with the Field Force;Allowances
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 64.
Clothing for the Troops
Flannel Underclothing
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 699.
Invalided Soldiers returning home;Warm Clothing
Qs. Mr. Orr-Ewing, Mr. Burdett-Coutts; As. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 19, 398.
Colonial Contingents
Pay;Comparison with the British Soldier's Pay
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 161; Mar. 21, 816.
Return Presented, Mar. 18, 200, 219.
Colvile, Gen., see Colvile.
Comforts for the Troops, see sub-heading Gifts.
Compensation for Losses;Charge upon the Republics, etc.
Q. Mr. A. Davies; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 60.
Despatches since Nov. 15
Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1088.
Expenditure;Army Supplementary Estimate, Mar. 15, 186.
Gifts for the Troops;Sending out free of Charge, etc.
Qs. Mr. Mansfield, Mr. Lambert, Mr. Bartley; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 698.
Helvetia Surrender;Allegation of Cowardice against Officer in Command
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 18, 220.
Horses
Canadian Horses, Purchase of
Q. Mr. G. Parker; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1089.
Establishing Remount Dep&#x00F4;t in Canada
Qs. Mr. G. Parker, Mr. Malcolm, Mr. Macdona; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19 399.
System of Purchase, Loss of Horses in South Africa, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 187.
Hospitals Commission
Committee of Experts, proposed
Q Dr. Thompson; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 22, 848.
Partial and Imperfect Inquiry alleged;Mr. Burdett-Coutts' Charges
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 10, 517.
Payment to Commissioners
Q. Mr. Dalziel; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 19, 397.
Inquiry
Conduct and Operations of the War, Objections to "General" Inquiry
Debate (Lords), Mar. 18, 201.
Lindley Disaster, see that subheading.
Ladysmith "Entanglement";Lord Wolseley's Duties as Commander-in-Chief, Controversy between Lord Wolseley and Marquess of Lansdowne. Mar. 15, 10, 14.
Ladysmith, Siege of
Communications between Sir R. Buller and Sir G. White;Laying on the Table
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 62.
Stores, Concentration of;Officer responsible for
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 21, 696.
Lindley Surrender
Colvile, Gen., see Colvile.
Finding of Court of Inquiry;Laying on the Table
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 61.
Finding of Court of Inquiry Presented, Mar. 21, 635, 694.
Names of Poisons who raised White Flag
Q. Sir C. Dilke; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1349.
Mafeking Siege;Theft of Government Foodstuff's by Sergeant Loney, Remission of Sentence.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 23, 992.
Meat;Contract with the South African Cold Storage Company, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 190.
Militia
Non-Commissioned Officers retaining Rank, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 65.
Officers' Rank;Conferring Army Rank, proposed
Q. Mr. G. Boscawen; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 18, 222.
Reservists on Active Service, Number of, Liability to serve beyond Term of Engagement
Qs. Sir. H. Vincent, Mr. Ffrench; As. Lord Stanley, Mar. 18, 221.
Naval Brigade;Copies of Despatches Ordered, Mar. 15, 59.
New South Wales Medical Contingent;In praise of
O. Mr. Burdett-Coutts, Mar. 19, 530.
Officers;Income Tax on Pay, Proposed Exemption.
Q. Major Rasch; A. Sir M. II. Beach, Mar. 26, 1300.
Paardeberg;Gen. Colvile's Report
Q. Mr. Allen; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 60.
Parcel Postage Rates;Proposed Reduction
Qs. Mr. Mansfield, Sir E. Ashmead-Bartlett; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 224.
Pay
Allowing Interest for Arrears
Q. Sir J. Leigh; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 22, 851.
Anomalies between the Pay of Regulars and Colonials, Yeomanry, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 816.
Inadequate Pay, Comparisons with the Pay of Colonial Troops
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 161, 165.
Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals
Qs. Mr. Schwann, Sir E. Ash-mead-Bartlett. Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 19, 396.
Qs. Mr. W. Redmond, Mr. Trevelyan, Mr. Pirie; As. Mi. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 848.
Q. Earl Spencer; A. Marquess of Salisbury, Mar. 19, 366.
Assistance to Boer Farmers after the War;Withdrawing words "by Loan" proposed
Q. Mr. W. Redmond; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar.25, 1086.
Communications between Gen. Botha and Lord Kitchener
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 23, 991.
Qs. Mr. Pirie, Mr. P. O'Brien: As. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1084.
Letter No. 10;Date of Despatch to Com. L. Botha.
Q. Mr. C. Grant; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 23, 992.
Q. Mr. C. Grant; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1086.
Papers Relating to;Laying on the Table
Q. Sir H. Campbell-Banner-man; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 694; Q. Mr. Black; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1350.
Papers Presented, Mar. 19, 365, 395.
Telegram No. 4;Date of Reception at War Office
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 23, 991.
Pensions for Widows and Orphans of Soldiers;Government Scheme
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Mr. Brodrick; Mar. 19, 397.
Q. Mr. Kearley; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 21, 697.
Os. Mr. Kearley, Mar. 21, 808; Mr. Arnold-Porster, Mar. 22, 981.
Plague at Cape Town, see title Cape Colony.
Prisoners;Boer Prisoners
Hertzog, Mrs., Case of
Q. Mr. Channing; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 21. 696.
Settlements in Canada and Australia proposed
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1087.
Provisions, Forage, etc.;Army Supplementary Vote, Mar. 15, 186.
Reinforcements;Sending untrained Men into the Field
Dilke, Sir C., on, Mar. 15, 140.
St. John Ambulance Brigade;Widow of Private Maddocks, Pension
Q. Mr. Pierpoint; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1089.
Shooting of British Subjects, MacLanglan and Boyd, by Order of Com. Delarey, alleged
Q. Mr. Maconochie; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 18, 220.
Q. Sir J. Fergusson; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1082.
Q. Mr. J. F. X. O'Brien; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1351.
Taaibosch;Train Wrecking by Boers
Q. Mr. J. K. Hardie; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 697.
Sentences against Wreckers, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Burke; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 22,847; Q. Mr. Haviland-Burke; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1083.
Volunteers
Cape Field Artillery Volunteers;Relief of
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 26, 1350.
London Scottish Volunteers;Relief Detachment sent to South Africa
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 65.
Training and Drill at Depots before Embarkation
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 25, 1088.
Warrant Officers. Treatment of
O. Mr. Kearley, Mar. 21, 808.
Yeomanry
Fife and Forfar Contingent;Reduction in Numbers, Date of Return, etc.
Q. Sir T. Lent; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15, 02.
Number of Officers and Men sent to South Africa;Training, etc.,
Q. Capt. Bagot; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1351.
Pay, Difference between Pay of Yeomanry and Regulars, see subheading Pay.
Reinforcements;Unsuitable recruits
O. Mr. J. P. Farrell, Mar. 21, 819.
Soldier Settlers in South Africa;pseudo- Yeomanry Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1163, 1165, 1179, 1188.
South Kensington Museum
Buckland Fish Collection, Removal of
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar.25, 1102.
South Lancashire Tramways Bill
I. 2R.* Mar. 18, 197.
South Shields
Telephone Charges
Q. Mr. L. Harris; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 859.
Southampton
Plague at;Reported Case, etc.
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 23, 993.
Sovereign's Oath on Accession Bill
Petitions, Mar. 15, 58; Mar. 19, 395; Mar. 25, 1081; Mar. 26, 1348.
Spain
Bilbao Harbour, Lighting of;Loss of "Avlona"
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 406.
Speaker
Bills, Titles of, Provisions which are not authorised by order of leave;Phraseology of the "Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill," Mar. 20, 567.
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents by the Times. Mar. 15, 60.
Instructions to Committees;Instructions out of Order, Mar. 15, 55, 56; Mar. 18, 215, 216.
Interruptions;Member has no right to interrupt unless the interrupted Member chooses to give way, Mar. 25, 1258.
Irrelevant Observations, Mar. 21, 684.
Motions for Adjournment of the House to discuss matter of urgent public importance
Irrelevant Observations, Mar. 22, 905, 912.
Supply Procedure;Consolidating Votes, 1890, Analogy, etc., Mar. 18, 216.
Point of Order. Mar. 21, 689.
Press Representatives;Admission to the Lobby, Mar. 18, 257.
Questions
Absence of Ministers, Mar. 27, 1440.
Addressing questions to the Chair not on Point of Order, Mar. 15, 103,
Wednesday and Saturday Sittings, Mar. 23, 994, 995.
Supply
Amendments for Reductions moved after the Speaker had put the Question, Mar. 21, 819.
Closure, Motion for, Mar. 22, 970.
Duties of Prime Minister, Discussing on Vote for Office of Lord Privy Seal, Mar. 25, 1234.
Irrelevant Observations, Mar. 21, 750; Mar. 22. 951; Mar. 25, 1130, 1145, 1147, 1149, 1150, 1151, 1164, 1183, 1192, 1202, 1203, 1220, 1245.
Matter for Substantive Motion, Mar. 25, 1233.
Procedure, Consolidating Votes, etc.;Change of Procedure without consulting the House, Mar. 25, 1161.
Tedious repetition of Argument, Mar. 20, 590.
Unparliamentary Language, Mar. 15, 118
Speeches in Parliament
Duration of Speeches;Twenty Minutes Limit proposed
Qs. Mr. Renwick, Major Rasch; As: Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 22, 880.
Spencer, Earl
China;Tientsin;Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 21, 639.
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 663.
Public Libraries Bill, Com., Mar. 25, 1064.
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Mar. 20, 1267.
Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against;Joint Committee of both Houses to inquire into, Mar. 21, 72.
South African War
Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the War, Mar. 18, 206.
Peace Negotiations between Com. Botha and Lord Kitchener, Mar. 19, 366.
War Office Administration;Lord Wolseley's indictment of the system introduced in 1895, Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 30.
Spring Assizes Act, 1879
Orders in Council Presented, Mar. 26, 1266, 1348.
Standing Orders
Amendments to Standing Orders 134c and 170a;Tramway Schemes (Commons), Mar. 15,45; (Lords)Standing Order 105d, Mar. 18, 199.
Stanley Lord;Financial Secretary to the War Office [Lancashire, W. Houghton]
Barracks
Dingwall Accommodation, Inadequacy of, Mar. 21, 702.
Ebrington Barracks, Londonderry;Delay in Enlargements, Mar. 21, 701.
Bullets;Mark IV. Ammunition, Breaking up Bullets, Mar. 15, 67; Mar. 19, 401; Mar. 21, 699; Mar. 22, 850; Mar. 26, 1354.
Civilian Doctors and Veterinary Surgeons at Home Stations;Rate of Pay, Mar. 15, 64.
Commissions from the Ranks;Outfit Grants. Mar. 18, 223.
Earthenware Goods;Use of Leadless Glaze, Mar. 26, 1364.
Examinations;French Syntax, Mar. 25, 1092.
Gibraltar;Failure of Cuby's Bank, Regimental Losses, Mar. 25, 1092.
Guns;Foreign-made Guns, Purchase of, etc., Mar. 15, 66.
Horses, Purchase of, Mar. 15, 189.
Hospitals;Replacing Barrack Forms by Chairs, Mar. 15, 66.
Meat;Foreign Meat Contracts, Mar. 15, 190, 194.
Militia
Allowances;Widow of Militiaman Dying during Embodiment, Mar. 22, 851.
Disembodiments, Mar. 25, 1091.
Officers
Promotions, Mar. 25, 1091.
Rank, Mar. 18, 222.
Officers
Half Pay and Retired Pay Declarations, Mar. 25, 1090.
Reserve;Requiring Officers to serve with Provisional Regiments, Mar. 26, 1352.
Temporary Staff Officers;Outfit Allowance, Mar. 18, 223.
Pensions
Beatty H., Case of, Mar. 15, 67.
Guinan, P., Case of, Mar. 19, 402.
Recruits;Under-age Recruits, Case of G. Buer, Mar. 21, 701.
Reform and Reorganisaion, Government Proposals;Replies to Questions and Criticisms, Mar. 15, 176.
Regimental Accounts, Keeping, Mar. 26. 1352.
Royal Reserve Regiments;Total Strength on Mar. 1, etc., Mar. 25, 1090.
Salisbury Plain;Police Arrangements, Mar. 26, 1353.
Schools
Adequacy of Teaching Staff, Suicide of Aldershot Schoolmaster, Mar. 21, 701.
Departmental Committee, Mar. 25, 1094.
Soldiers' Kits;Shirt Allowance, etc., Mar. 21, 700; Mar. 26, 1354.
South African War
Civil Surgeons;Allowances, Mar. 15, 64.
Clothing for the Troops;Flannel Underclothing, Mar. 21, 699.
Gifts for the Troops;Sending out free of Charge, Mar. 21, 698.
Horses;Purchase of Canadian Horses, Mar. 19, 399; Mar. 25, 1089.
London Scottish Volunteers;Relief Detachment sent to South Africa. etc., Mar 15, 65.
Militia
Non-commissioned Officers retaining Rank, etc., Mar. 15, 65.
Reservists on Active Service;Number of, Liability to serve an extra year, etc., Mar. 18, 221.
Pay of Soldiers;Arrears, Mar.33,852.
St. John Ambulance Brigade;Pensions, Mar. 25, 1089.
Silesia, British Army Enlistments in, alleged, Mar. 26, 1351.
Taaibosch;Boer Atrocity, Mar. 21. 698.
Volunteers;Cape Field Artillery, Relief of, Mar. 26, 1350.
Strathcona's Horse;Troopers wearing Ribbon of Medal, &amp;c, Mar. 18, 222.
Strength of the Army;Establishment before South African War, Mar. 25. 1093.
Swiss Military System;Publishing Information, etc., Mar. 15, 66.
Volunteers
Regimental Sergeant-Majors;Granting Warrant Rank, proposed, Mar. 25, 1090.
Scottish Volunteers
Artillery;Rearmament, Mar. 21, 702.
Queen Victoria's Funeral
Number of Volunteers attending, etc., Mar. 19, 400.
Treatment of Volunteers, Details of Cost, etc., Mar. 25, 1094, 1095.
Seaforth Volunteers, Mar. 18, 224.
Sergeant-majors;Rate of Pay, Mar. 19, 400.
Yeomanry
Marching Allowances, Mar. 22, 851.
Training;Army Order, etc., Mar. 19, 400; Mar. 21, 700.
Stanley of Alderley, Lord
India
Ancient Monuments, Preservation of;Vandalism at Bijapur, etc., Mar. 19, 385.
Native Publications;Charge of Sedition against Mr. Malabari, Mar. 22. 834.
Scottish Presbyterian Soldiers, Use of Government Churches, Mar. 25, 1068.
Stanmore, Lord
Indian Ancient Monuments;Imperial and Colonial Magazine Article
Os. Lord Stanley of Alderley, Earl of Hardwicke, Mar. 9, 385, 386.
Stationery and Government Printing
Expenditure
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1269.
Place of Manufacture
Debate in Com. of Supply, Star. 25, 1215.
Vote for, Mar. 18, 377; Mar. 19, 428.
Steel
Import Duty on Steel, Proposed
Q. Mr. F. Hope; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 25, 1100.
Stepney Schools
Number of Board and Voluntary Schools in Areas H. L. J. and K. of Tower Hamlets
Q. Major Evans-Gordon; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 19, 411.
Site scheduled in Arbour Square
Q. Major Evans-Gordon; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 19, 411.
Stevenson, Mr. F. S. [Suffolk, Eye]
Treaties between Great Britain and Continental Powers, Mar. 21, 707.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 680.
Stewartstown
St. Patrick's Day Meeting;Proclamation, etc.
Qs. Mr. Doogan, Mr. Flavin, Mr. Flynn; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15 95; O. Mr. Doogan, Mar. 25, 1259.
Stipendiary Magistrates
see Magistrates and Justices of the Peace.
Stock, Mr. J. H. (Liverpool, Walton]
Yeomanry Training, Mar. 19, 399; Mar. 21. 700.
Stornoway
Mails;Mallaig and Stornoway new Steamer Service
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 237.
Training Ships;Proposed Visit
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster. Mar. 22, 852.
Stowmarket
Foot and Mouth Disease Regulations;Removal of Restrictions
Q. Mr. Malcolm; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 19, 409.
Strabane
Great Northern Railway Company;Mer chants' Complaints, Delay in hearing Case.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 23, 992.
Strachey, Mr. E. [Somerset, S.]
Cornwall, Duchy of;Coal Royalties in Somerset, Mar. 22, 859.
Wallasey Improvement Bill. Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 673.
Stranorlar District, Ireland.
Labourers' Cottages;Delay in issuing Provisional Order
Q. Mr. Boyle; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar. 22, 867.
Strathcona's Horse
Permitting Troopers to wear Ribbon of Medal pending Issue of Medal, etc.
Q. Sir E. Sassoon; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 18, 222.
Stroud Gas Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 18, 216.
Stroyan, Mr. J. [Perthshire, W.]
Dunkeld Railway Facilities, Mar. 26, 1361.
Submarine Vessels
Decision of the Admiralty to Experiment with
Arnold-Forster's, Mr., Statement, Mar. 18, 332.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 772; Mar. 22, 948, 957, 976; Mar. 23, 1043, 1048, 1053.
Summary Jurisdiction
Courts of Petty Sessions;Alteration of Law, proposed
Q. Sir J. Rankin; A. Mr. J. Collings, Mar. 22, 856.
Summary Jurisdiction (Ireland) Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 19, 427.
Sunday Closing (Wales) Act (1881) Amendment Bill
Petition, Mar. 19, 395.
Superannuation
Civil Service, see Pool Law Officers Superannuation Act, etc.
Supply
Army and Navy Estimates, sec those titles.
Civil Service and Revenue Departments Estimates
Excesses of £;24 2s.;Com* Mar. 23, 1059; Rep. * Mar. 25, 1128.
Supplementary Estimates
Colonial Services;£;212,300, Com.* Mar. 18, 337; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Colonies;Salaries and Expenses of Department;£;7,200, Rep. Mar. 25, 1227.
Cornwall and York, Duke and Duchess of, Visit to the Colonies;£;20,000, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Diplomatic and Consular Buildings;£;2,000, Rep. Mar. 25, 1221.
Diplomatic and Consular Services;£;15,800, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Estimate presented, Mar. 15, 59.
Foreign AHairs;Salaries and Expenses of Department;£;6,000, Rep. Mar. 25, 1227.
Inland Revenue;£;20,000, Com* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1157.
Local Loans Fund;£;4,337, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
London University;£;70, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep. Mar. 25, 1156.
Miscellaneous Legal Expenses;£;400, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Post Office;£;130,000, Com* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep. Mar. 25, 1157.
Post Office Packet Service;£;10, Com* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1157.
Post Office and Telegraph Buildings;£;7,000, Rep. Mar. 25, 1221.
Privy Seal;Salaries and Expenses of the Office;£;1,015, Rep. Mar. 25, 1227.
Queen Victoria, Funeral of;£;35,500, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Savings Banks and Friendly Societies Deficiencies;£;51,758, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Secretary for Scotland, Office of;£;100, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Stationery and Printing;£;110,000, Com.* Mar. 18. 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Superannuation and Retired
Allowances;£;10,000, Com* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Temporary Commissions;£;9,000, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19. 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Treasury Chest Fund;£;66,108, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Uganda, etc., British Protectorates;£;200,000, Com.* Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Wallace Collection;£;3,333, Com. * Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428; Rep.* Mar. 25, 1156.
Vote on Account;£;17,304,000, Rep. Mar. 25, 1241.
Procedure
Alteration in Form of Presenting Supplementary Estimates;Consolidating Votes, etc.
Debate, Mar. 18, 257; Mar. 19, 428; Mar. 25, 1157, 1160, 1167, 1211, 1224.
Appointment of Committee
Qs. Col. Milward. Sir J. Brunner, Sir H. Campbell-Bannerman, Mr. Lambert; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 742.
Q. Sir W. Thorburn; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1386.
Increase in Supplementary Estimates, Insufficient Details etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 19, 479, 487.
Saturday Sitting of the House,
Motion (Mr. A. J. Balfour) Mar. 22, 923;Amendment (Mr. Dillon), 925.
Surveys
Drift Surveys in England and Ireland;Date of Completion
Qs. Mr. Field; As. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 22, 858; Mar. 25, 1103; Mar. 26, 1365.
Swiss Military System
Publishing Information with regard to
Q. Mr. Yerburgh; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 15, 66.
Swiss Rifle Ranges
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1279, 1288.
"Sybille," H.M.S.
Wreck of;Officers and Men on Duty, Salvage Operations, etc.
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 21, 702.
T
Taaibosch
see South African War.
Talbot, Lord E. [Sussex, Chichester]
Education;Deaf and Dumb Children, Schools for Roman Catholic Children, Mar. 21, 714.
Talbot, Rt. Hon. J. G. [Oxford University]
Lead Poisoning;Government Contracts, Use of Leadless Glaze, Mar. 26, 1364.
London School Board;Accommodation, Mar. 26, 1365.
Tallow Conspiracy Case
Number of jurors ordered to stand aside
Q. Mr.' O'Shee; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 18, 249.
Taylor, Mr. T. C. [Lancashire, Radcliffe]
Extradition Treaty with United States, Mar. 21, 708.
Tea
Importation of InferiorTea;Local Government Board Inspectors analysing tea, &amp;c.
Q. Mr. H. Hobhouse; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 716.
Teachers
see titles Education and National School Teachers.
Teachers' Superannuation Act, 1898
Elementary School Teachers' Deferred Annuity Funds (England and Scotland);Accounts Presented, Mar. 22, 834, 846.
Telegrams
Foreign Office and Colonial Office Telegrams see titles Foreign Office and Colonial Office.
Telegraph Buildings
Vote for, Mar. 25, 1221.
Telegraph Service (Manchester)
Promotions;Telegraphists refunding Back Pay, etc.
Q. Mr. Schwann; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 721.
Telegraphy
Wireless Telegraphy, see that title.
Telephone Service
Districts, Transferring from one Exchange area to another
Qs. Mr. M'Kenna; As. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 238; Mar. 21, 721.
Shields;Charges between North and South Shields.
Q. Mr. L. Harris; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 22, 859.
Temporary Commissions
Vote for, Mar. 18, 337; Mar. 19, 428.
Tennant, Mr. H. J. [Berwickshire]
Factory and Workshops Act Amendment Bill;Date of Introduction, Mar. 15, 77.
Thames Deep Water Dock Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 18, 217.
Thomas, Mr. D. A. [Merthyr Tydvil]
Merthyr Tydvil Stipendiary Magistrates and Local Justices, Correspondence between, Mar. 25, 1100.
Thomastown
Petty Sessions District;Number of Protestant Magistrates, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 93.
Sanitation;Local Government Board Inspectors, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Mara; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 93.
Thompson, Dr. [Monaghan, N.]
Clones Bail way Gates;Obstruction to Traffic, etc., Mar. 18, 252.
Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan;Liquor Licensing Case, Mar. 18, 248.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, position of, Mar. 21, 760.
South African Hospitals Commission Attack on Army Medical Department, etc., Mar 19, 546.
Committee of Experts proposed, Mar. 22, 848
Thorburn, Sir W. [Peebles and Selkirk]
Supply;Allocation of Votes, Proposed Committee, Mar. 26, 1386.
Tientsin
see China, Anti-Foreign Rising.
"Times"
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents
Qs. Mr. E. Robertson, Mr. W. Redmond, Mr. T. M. Healy; As. Sir R. Finlay, Sir M. H. Reach, Mar. 15, 102; Qs. Mr. Roche, Mr. Young; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Sir R. Finlay, Mar. 18, 256.
Special Report from Committee, Mar. 15, 59.
Tipperary
County Surveyor, Increase in Salary by the Local Government Board Dispute
Debate on the Consolidated Fund Bill, Mar. 26, 1403.
Tithes
Averages, System of ascertaining;Complaints
Q. Col. Milward; A. Mr. Hanbury, Mar. 21, 715.
Tomkinson, Mr. J. [Cheshire, Crewe]
Army;Regimental Accounts, Mar. 26, 1352.
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 593.
Tonnage Rates
Grand Canal, Ireland;Tonnage Rate for Inland Waterway Boats, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1383.
Torrington and Oakhampton Railway Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 20, 557.
Tottenham Common Land
Great Eastern Railway Bill;Instruction to Committee
Motion (Mr. Tully), Mar. 15, 48.
Tottenham and Hampstead Junction Railway Bill
c. 2R.* Mar. 20, 557.
Trade, Board of
President;Rt. Hon. G. W. Balfour.
Parliamentary Secretary;Earl of Dudley.
Constitution and Functions
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 79.
Irish Department, Proposed
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 873.
Trade Marks
Brussels Conference;Laying Papers on the Table
Q. Mr. Stuart-Wortley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 22, 854.
Trade Reports Presented
Annual Series, Mar. 18, 219; Mar. 21, 636, 694; Mar. 25, 1062, 1082.
Trade and Commerce
Colonies;Reciprocity Treatment for the Mother Country
Q. Mr. G. Davies; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1096.
German Brushes;Total Value of Imports to Great Britain
Q. Mr. Langley; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 15, 78.
Migration of Factories, etc., from England to other Countries
Qs. Sir H. Vincent. Mr. J. Lowther; As. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 712.
Training Colleges
Examinations;Qualifications for First Class
Q. Mr. Morrell; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 19, 412.
Training Ships
see Navy, also Names of Ships.
Tramore
Boat-slip proposed;Gunnery Practice for Naval Reserve
Debate on the Navy Estimates, Mar. 23, 1019, 1026.
Tramways
Consent of Local Authorities;Petition, Mar. 25, 1063.
Standing Orders relating to Tramway Schemes;Amendments (Commons), Mar. 15, 45,46; (Lords), Mar. 18, 198.
Transport Service
Supplementary Vote, Mar. 15, 186.
Transvaal
Concessions Commission
Constitution of Commission, etc.
Markham's, Mr., Attack on Mr. Loveday, etc., Mar. 19, 453.
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 25, 1162.
Financial Condition;Sir D. Barbour's Report, Value of Beewaarplaatzen etc.
Q. Mr. M'Dermott; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 26, 1349.
Forster, Mr. Douglas;Appointment to-Legal Post
Q. Sir B. Gurdon; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 21, 695.
Land Settlement Commission, etc., see South African Land Settlement
Repatriation of Refugee Families at the Expense of H.M. Government
Q. Mr. Fuller; A. Mr. J. Chamberlain, Mar. 25, 1087.
Transubstantiation
see Roman Catholicism, King's Declaration against.
Travers' Foundation
Report on Administration
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Pretyman, Mar. 15, 70.
Trawling
Gunboats;Protection against Illegal Trawling
Ireland
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 810; Mar. 23, 1000, 1008, 1016, 1017, 1044, 1045, 1052; Mar. 25, 1131, 1145, 1149, 1150.
Names and Number of Gunboats, etc.
Qs. Mr. Joyce, Mr. J. O'Connor, Mr. Flavin, Mr. W. Redmond; As. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 25, 1122.
Scotland
O. Mr. Weir, Mar. 22, 970.
"Jackal," H.M.S.;Leave of Absence for Officers and Men
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 18, 225.
Scotland
Foula, Island of, Illegal Trawling Prosecution
Q. Mr. C. Wason; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 861.
Infringement of bye-laws Prosecutions;Return Presented, Mar. 22, 846.
Lightkeepers at Tiumpan Lighthouse Reporting Trawlers, Remuneration, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 860.
Number of Convictions in 1900, etc.
Q. Mr. Weir; A. Mr. A. G. Murray, Mar. 22, 860.
Treasury
First Lord;Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour.
Financial Secretary;Mr. A. Chamberlain.
Treasury Chest Fund
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 23, 1210, 1213.
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Treasury Control
Relation between the Treasury and the Admiralty
Debates on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 799; Mar. 22, 958, 963.
Treaties
see Names of Treaties.
Trevelyan, Mr. C. P. [York, W.R., Ellad]
South African War;Peace Negotiations with Boer Generals, Mar. 22, 848.
Trinity College, Dublin
Commission on University Education, Including Trinity College in the Inquiry Proposed
Qs. Mr. Bryce, Sir T. Esmonde, Mr. Dillon; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1123.
Trout Fishing Annual Close Time (Scotland) Bill
Petition, Mar. 18, 218.
Tuberculosis
Local Government Board Regulations, Sanitary Authorities adopting as Bye-laws;Unlawful Seizures, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 22, 856.
Tufnell, Col. E. [Essex, S.E.]
Hyde Park Gates;Allowing Cabs to pass through, etc., Mar. 18, 234.
Tully, Mr. J. [Leitrim, S.]
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 48.'
Sale of Intoxicating Liquors to Children Bill, 2R., Mar. 20, 585.
South African War
Horses, System of Purchase;Loss of Horses in South Africa, etc., Mar. 15, 187.
Hospitals Commission Report, etc., Mar. 19, 545.
Turbine Machinery
"Viper" and "Cobra" Tests
Q. Sir T. Wrigbtson; A. Mr. Arnold -Forster, Mar. 22, 852.
Turkey
Anglo-Turkish Convention, 1878;Repeal, etc.
Q. Mr. Stevenson; J. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 21, 707.
Macedonia;Turkish Excesses at Uscub, alleged
Q. Mr. J. Ellis; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 406.
Tweedmouth, Lord
Inquiry into Conduct and Operations of the South African War, Mar. 18, 208,
Parliamentary Papers, Delay in Delivery to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 842.
Public Libraries Bill, Com., Mar. 25, 1064.
Reading Clerk and Clerk of Outdoor Committees;Appointment of Mr. E. H. Alderson, Mar. 15, 3.
Rifle Ranges for Volunteers, Mar. 26,1278, 1288, 1289.
War Office Administration;Lord Wolseley's indictment of the system introduced in 1895, Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 41.
Twelve o'clock Rule
Exemption from Standing Order;Business of Supply.
Motions (Mr. A. J. Balfour), Mar. 19, 422; Mar. 22, 917.
Twine Contracts
Post Office
Q. Mr. K. Hardie; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 81.
U
Uganda
British Protectorate;Vole for, Mar. 18, 337; Mar. 19, 428.
Ulster
Portadown Disturbances;see that title.
Winter Assizes;Date of Assizes last held at Londonderry, etc.
Q. Mr. O'Doherty; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 25, 1107.
Unclaimed Funds
Amount of;Utilising for Relief of Taxation proposed
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Sir M. H. Beach, Mar. 18, 229.
Under-Age Recruits
see Army Recruits.
United States
Army System
O. Mr. Arthur Lee, Mar. 15, 141,144.
British Factories, Removal to United States;Return
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 21, 712.
Extradition Treaty with Great Britain;Extension to Offences against Bankruptcy Laws, etc.
Qs. Mr. Taylor, Mr. Schwann, Sir H. Vincent; As. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 21, 708.
Mail Service, Time Occupied in Transit, etc.;Return Presented, Mar. 23, 990; Mar. 25, 1081.
Naval War Code;Cutting Submarine Cables in War Time
Q. Sir J. Colomb; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 26, 1358.
Navy
British Sailors joining the American Navy
O. Mr Morton, Mar. 23, 1038.
Expenditure
O. Mr. E. Robertson, Mar. 21, 779.
Nicaragua Canal, see that title.
Universities
see Names of Universities.
University Education, Ireland
see Ireland.
Uscub
Turkish Excesses
Q. Mr. J, Ellis; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 19, 406.
V
Vaccination
Bradford Anti-vaccinationists;Arrest of W. Mottershead
Q. Mr. Bell; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 231.
Local Government Board Circular;Withdrawal proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. Levy; As. Mr. Chaplin, Mr. Long, Mar. 15, 80.
Pauper Children;Vaccination Officials appointed by Board of Guardians, etc.
Q. Mr. Goddard; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 717.
Vale of Clwyd
Postal Service;Conveying Mails by Train Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 82.
Vans
Dangers of Covered Vans;Regulations proposed
Q. Mr. T. Dewar; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 18, 232.
Vatican
King's Accession;Announcement to the Pope
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 741.
Vaughan, Cardinal
Pastoral on Liberal Catholicism
Os. Lord Kinnaird, Marquess of Salisbury, Mar. 19, 377, 378.
"Victoria and Albert"
New Royal Yacht
Expenditure on, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 776.
Water-tube Boilers
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 21, 777, 798.
Vincent, Sir E. [Exeter]
Savings Banks and Friendly Society Deficiencies, Mar. 25, 1201.
Vincent, Sir H. [Sheffield, Central]
Army
Reserve, Increase in, Mar. 26, 1354.
Staff, Reorganisation, Mar. 26, 1354.
Sheffield File Trade with Russia, Mar. 21, 712.
South African War
Boer Prisoners;Settlements in Canada and Australia, proposed, Mar. 25, 1087.
Militia Reservists on Active Service, Number of, etc., Mar. 18, 221.
United States, Extradition Treaty, Mar. 21, 709.
Volunteers' Summer Camps, Publishing Arrangements, Mar. 18, 223.
"Viper"
Turbine Machinery Tests
Q. Sir T. Wrightson; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar. 22, 852.
Vivisection
Petition for Prohibition, Mar. 19, 395.
Volunteers
Camps;Delay in Publishing Arrangements
Q. Sir H. Vincent; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 18, 223.
Discipline
Os. Col. Brookfield, Mar. 15, 167; Lord Stanley, 178.
Reforms and Reorganisation;Government Proposals
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 131.
Regimental Serjeant-Majors
Granting Warrant Rank, proposed
Q. Mr. A. Lee; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 25, 1090.
Rate of Pay
Q. Mr. Lowe; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19, 400.
Rifle Ranges
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1207.
Scotch Volunteers
Artillery;Re-arming with 4.7 Guns
Q. Mr. Nichol; A. Lord Stanley. Mar. 21, 702.
Queen's Funeral, Scotch Volunteers at, see title Queen Victoria.
Seaforth Volunteers, see that title.
South African War, see that title.
Training of Officers, etc.
O. Mr. C. Warner, Mar. 15, 157.
Vote on Account
see Supply.
Vowler, Rev. A. N.
Living offered to, by the Lord Chancellor;Cancellation of Offer, etc.
Q. Earl of Mount-Edgcumbe; A. Earl of Halsbury, Mar. 19, 388.
W
Wales
Holyhead Harbour;Government Grant
Q. Mr. J. O'Connor; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 25, 1102.
Merthyr Tydvil Stipendiary Magistrates and Local Justices;Relative Position and Authority
Q. Mr. D. A. Thomas; A. Mr. Ritchie, Mar. 25, 1100.
Pontypool Telephone Exchange Area
Q. Mi. M'Kenna; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 238.
Vale of Clwyd Postal Service;Conveying Mails by Train proposed
Q. Mr. H. Roberts; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 15, 82.
Walker, Col. W. H. [Widnes]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1500.
Wallace, Inspector
Retention beyond term of Office
Q. Mr. C. O'Kelly; A. Mr. Wyndham. Mar. 18, 246.
Wallace Collection
Vote for, Mar. 18, 338; Mar. 19, 428.
Wallasey Improvement Bill
c. Instruction to Com., Mar. 21, 673.
Wallasey Improvement Bill
Instruction to Committee Debate, Mar. 21, 673.
Registration, Effect of, Registrar's Powers, etc., 674, 678, 679, 680.
Superior Officers of the Council, Application of Provisions of Friendly Societies Acts, 677, 681, 682.
Wallsend
Municipal Corporation;Charter of Incorporation of the Borough of Wallsend, Presented, Mar. 15, 5, 58.
Walton, Mr. J. [York W.R., Barnsley]
China;Tien-tsin, Anglo-Russian Dispute, Mar. 18, 227; Mar. 19, 404.
Ministerial Statement on Critical Situation in Foreign Atiairs;Withholding Information from the House of Commons which had been given to the House of Lords, Mar. 22, 891.
War Office
Secretary of State;Rt. Hon. St. John Brodrick.
Under Secretary;hard Raglan.
Financial Secretary;Lord Stanley.
Administration;Duties of Commander-in-Chief, Order in Council of 1895, etc.
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15,131, 150.
Administration;Lord Wolseley's Indictment against the system introduced in 1895, etc.;Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury.
Memorandum and Minutes by the Marquess of Lansdowne and Mr. Brodrick, on Lord Wolseley's Memorandum, Presented, Mar. 15, 5.
Delay in Delivery of Parliamentary Paper in House of Lords.
Os. Lord Tweedmouth, Duke of Devonshire, Mar. 22, 842.
Motion (Lord Wolseley), Mar. 15, 6.
Allegations against Lord Wolseley;Personal attack, etc., 6, 7, 33.
Army Board, 25.
Auxiliary Forces, Neglect of, 8, 20.
Correspondence which should be under the control of the Commander-in-Chief, 27.
Discipline of the Army, Control of, 26.
Order in Council of 1895;Attack on, 13, 14.
Papers;Objections to Producing Confidential Papers, 21, 24, 31, 36, 41, 42, 43.
Secretary of State for War, Position of, Responsibility, etc., 7.
South African War, Defence Schemes, Preparation for Hostilities, etc., 10, 14, 23, 35.
Contracts, see Army.
Reform;Government Proposals
Debate on the Estimates, Mar. 15, 140, 142, 150, 158, 163.
Releasing Staff Officers for Service in the Field, Objections to Lee, Mr., on, Mar. 15, 147.
War Relief Funds
Joint Committee of Inquiry;Supplementing Scheme of Government Pensions, etc., Members Nominated, etc., Mar. 26, 1435.
Warner, Mr. C. [Stafford, Lichfield]
Army;Reform and Reorganisation Proposals, Mar. 15, 152.
Diplomatic Service;Increase in Expenditure, Mar. 25, 1211.
Great Eastern Railway Bill, Instruction to Com., Mar. 15, 52.
Warrant Officers
see Navy.
Wars
Chamberlain's, Mr., Administration of the Colonial Office;Mr. Chamberlain's Responsibility for three Wars
Lloyd-George, Mr., on, and Mr. Chamberlain's Reply, Mar. 19, 441.
Wason, Mr. C. [Orkney and Shetland]
Foula, Island of, Illegal Trawling off, Mar. 22, 861.
South African War;Colonial Contributions, Pay of Colonial Troops, etc., Mar. 21, 820.
Wason, Mr. E. [Clackmannan and Kinross]
H.M.S. "Britannia," Influenza Outbreak, Mar. 15, 67.
Water-tube Boilers
see Navy;Boilers.
Waterford Assizes
Tallow Conspiracy Case;Number of Jurors ordered to stand aside
Q. Mr. O'Shee; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 18, 249.
Ways and Means
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, Resolution, Mar. 23, 1059; Report, Mar. 25 1263.
Weights and Measures Bill
c. 1R.* Mar. 20, 631.
Weir, Mr. J. G. [Ross and Cromarty]
Applecross Cart Road, Construction of, Mar. 18, 239.
Avoch Harbour, Repair of, etc., Mar. 15, 86; Mar. 18, 241; Mar. 22, 862; Mar. 26, 1367.
Bilbao Harbour, Lighting;Loss of "Avlona Castle," Mar. 19, 406.
Broad Bay, Illegal Trawling in, Mar. 22, 860.
Buckland Fish Collection;Removal from South Kensington Museum, Mar. 25, 1102.
Congested Districts;Migration of Crofters and Cottars, Mar. 25, 1106, 1107.
Congested Districts Board
Parliamentary Grant;Crofter Holdings, Mar. 19, 414.
Report;Date of Issue, Mar. 19, 415.
Road Construction, Mar. 18, 241; Mar. 19, 415.
Cromarty Firth;Naval Station proposed, Mar. 25, 1095, 1096.
Dingwell Barrack Accommodation, Inadequacy of, Mar. 21, 702.
Edinburgh;Inland Revenue Buildings, Construction of new Buildings, Mar. 18, 234.
Gaya Bay;Establishment of Naval Station proposed, Mar. 15, 70.
Highland Railways;Mixed Trains, Mar. 21, 709.
Hospital Accommodation in Highlands and Islands Mar. 15, 86.
Inver;Disfranchisement of Householders, Mar. 21, 725.
"Jackal," H.M.S.;Leave of Absence for Officers and Men, Mar. 18, 225.
Kessock Ferry;Conveyance of Mails as Passengers' Luggage, Mar. 18, 235.
Lewis, Island of
Congested Condition, etc., Mar. 15, 87.
Crofters' Holdings, Mar. 19, 414.
Road Construction, Mar. 21, 723; Mar. 26, 1367.
Light Railways in Highland Crofting Counties, Mar. 21, 710; Mar. 25, 1106; Mar. 26, 1361.
Loch Carloway;Beacon, Erection of, etc., Mar. 26, 1367.
Mallaig Railway;Delay in Opening, Mar. 22, 855.
Mark IV. Ammunition;Breaking up Bullets, Mar. 15, 67; Mar. 19, 401; Mar. 21, 699; Mar. 22, 849, 850.
Metropolitan Railway;Ventilation, Mar. 26, 1363.
Navigation Classes in Evening Schools;Number of Scholars, etc., Mar. 21, 723.
Navy;Recruiting, Training Slap for Stornoway, etc., Mar. 22, 852; Mar. 25,1148.
Poultry Breeding in the Highlands, Mar. 22, 862.
Queen Victoria, Funeral of;Scottish Volunteers attending
Number of, Mar. 19, 400.
Treatment of;Details of Cost, etc., Mar. 18, 224; Mar. 25, 1094, 1095.
Railway Bye-laws;New Code, Mar. 15, 77.
Sheriffs' Salaries;Report of Committee, Mar. 22, 863, 864.
Small Holdings in Crofting Counties, Mar. 26, 1366.
South African War
Cape Field Artillery Volunteers;Relief, Mar. 26, 1350.
Civil Surgeons' Allowances, Mar. 15, 64.
London Scottish Volunteers;Relief Detachment sent to South Africa, etc., Mar. 15, 65.
Militia;Non-Commissioned Officers retaining Rank, etc., Mar. 15, 65.
Stornoway Mails;New Steamer Service between Stornoway and Mallaig, Mar. 18, 237.
Trawling
Naval Ships for patrolling the Fishing Grounds round the Coast, Mar. 22, 970.
Number of Convictions in 1900, etc., Mar. 22 860.
Welby, Col. A. C. E. [Taunton]
Armj;Reforms and Reorganisation, Government Proposals Mar. 15, 162.
Wernher, Beit, &amp; Co., Messrs.
Markham's, Mr., Attack on Mr. Loveday, etc., Mar. 19, 453.
West African Frontier Force
see Africa, West.
Westminster Hall
Use of for State Opening of Parliament, Objections to
O. Earl of Feversham, Mar. 18, 214.
Westport Petty Sessions
Contempt of Court, Number of Cases;Case of Mrs. Salmon, etc.
Q. Mr. J. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1372.
Scahill, Convictions against;Statements, by Mr. Starkie
Q. Mr. J. O'Donnell; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 21, 735.
County Officials' Salaries and the Local Government Board Dispute;Appeals, etc.
Debate on the Consolidated Fund Bill, Mar. 26, 1389.
Fermanagh Co.;Proposed Inquiry
Q. Mr. Jordan; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 15, 96.
Local Government Circular;Decision of Court of Appeal based on, etc.
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 864.
Local Government Board Vote;Affording Opportunity for Discussion
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 18, 244; Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 19, 421.
Report of Judgment Presented, Mar. 19, 396.
Return Presented, Mar. 20, 565; Mar. 21, 693.
Land Purchase
Expediting Inquiry
Q. Sir T. Esmonde; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 19, 420.
Government Intentions
Qs. Sir T. Esmonde, Mr. Ffreneh; As. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 21, 739.
Wheat
Gambling in Futures in Grain;Operation of German Law, etc.
Q. Mr. Field; A. Mr. G. Balfour, Mar. 26, 1362.
Gazette Price of British Wheat in March 1900 and 1901;Mean Price of 4 lb. Loaf
Q. Mr. Lambert; A. Mr. G. Balfour Mar. 25, 1101.
White, Sir G.
Claim for Damage to Property
Q. Mr. J. Campbell; A. Mr. Atkinson, Mar. 23,1117.
White Estate, Bantry
Date of Sale
Q. Mr. Gilhooly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 26, 1375.
Whiteley, Mr. G. [York, W.R., Pudsey]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1459, 1469.
South African Land Settlement Commission Report, Publishing Report;Settling Soldiers on the Land, etc., Mar.
25, 1187.
Whitmore, Mr. C. A. [Chelsea]
London Water (Purchase) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1308.
Whittaker, Mr. T. P. [York, W.R., Spen Valley]
Dublin Castle Authorities, Overriding of the Law;Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 127.
Wilson, Mr. F. W. [Norfolk, Mid]
Forehoe Guardians and Workhouse Master, Differences between, Mar. 26, 1363.
Rifle Shooting, Provision of Rifle Ranges, ete., Mar. 15, 181.
Wilson, Mr. H. J. [York, W.R., Holmfirth]
Naval Expenditure;Unnecessary Extravagance, Mar. 25, 1132.
Poor Law Medical Relief and the Franchise, Mar. 21, 717.
Winchester, Lord Bishop of
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 642.
Licensing Sessions Bill and Habitual Drunkards Bill;Explanation, Mar. 18, 201.
Winchester School
Rifle Range Question
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26,1269.
Windsor, Lord
Public Libraries Bill, 2R., Mar. 18, 211; Com., Mar.25, 1064, 1065, 1066.
Wines
Imported;Return Presented, Mar. 22, 846.
Winnington Park School
County Council Scholarships;Extending Age Limit of Children proposed
Q. Sir J. Brunner; A. Sir J. Gorst, Mar. 21, 713.
Wireless Telegraphy
Adopting by British Steamship Companies;Post Office Requirements
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. A. Chamberlain, Mar. 18, 235.
Navy;Operations conducted on Cruisers escorting "Ophir," etc.
Q. Sir J. Leng; A. Mr. Arnold-Forster, Mar.26, 1355.
Wodehouse, Mr. A. [Essex, Saffron Walden]
Beer Bill, 2R., Mar. 27, 1477.
Radwinter and Hempstead Postal Arrangements, Mar. 18, 237.
Wolseley, Vise.
War Office Administration;Lord Wolseley's Indictment of the system introduced in 1895;Lord Wolseley's Memorandum to Lord Salisbury, Mar. 15, 6, 15, 16, 41, 42, 44
Memorandum Presented, Mar. 15, 5.
Wolverhampton and Cannock Chase Railway Bill
c. Report,* Mar. 25, 1080.
Minutes of Evidence of Session 1898 referred to Committee, Mar. 20, 557.
Women's Suffrage
see Parliamentary Franchise.
Woolwich
Royal Military Academy
Cadets Wearing Shamrock on St. Patrick's Day
Q. Capt. Donelan: A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1353.
Report of Board of Visitors, Mar. 21, 635, 693.
Worcester Tramways Bill
l. 1R.* Mar. 22, 833.
Workhouses
Dietary;New Dietary Order, Postponement, proposed, etc.
Q. Mr. B. Jones; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 21, 718.
Forehowe;Dispute between Guardians and Master of Workhouse, Resignation of Guardians, etc.
Q. Mr. F. W. Wilson; A. Mr. Long, Mar. 26, 1363.
Ireland
Almalgamation of Workhouses;Number amalgamated since 1888, Hates, etc.
Qs. Mr. Daly, Mr. J. P. Farrell; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 865.
Bailieborough Union Ambulance;Payment for Horsing, Action of Local Government Board
Q. Mr. S. Young; A. Mr. Wyndham Mar. 25, 1114.
Carrickmacross Workhouse Dietary;Action of Local Government Board
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 728.
Nurses;Appointment of Trained Nurses
Q. Mr. Daly; A. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 21, 727; Q. Mr. J. P. Farrell; A. Mr. Wyndbam, Mar. 21, 733.
Powers of Local Government Board
Qs. Mr. Daly, Mr. J. P. Farrell; As. Mr. Wyndham, Mar. 22, 866.
Shillelagh Union, see that title.
Workmen's Compensation
Provident Funds, see that title.
Wormwood Scrubbs
Volunteers and Rifle Range Accommodation
Debate (Lords), Mar. 26, 1269, 1271, 1277.
Wortley, Rt. Hon. Stuart [Sheffield, Hallam]
Deputy Chairman;Supply, Irrelevant Observations, etc., Mar. 19, 536, 537.
Patents
Brussels Conference;Papers relating to, Mar. 22, 854.
Committee's Report, Mar. 22, 854.
Wrightson, Sir T. [St. Pancras, E.]
Navy;Turbine Machinery Tests, "Viper" and "Cobra," Mar. 22, 852.
Wyndham, Rt. Hon. G.;Chief Secretary for Ireland [Dover]
Agriculture and Technical Instruction Act, 1899;Section 17, etc., Mar. 26, 1371.
Arran Islands;Fever Outbreak, Mar. 25, 1114.
Bansha Graveyard;Inquiry, Mar. 22, 871.
Belfast Pauper Graveyard;Overcrowded Condition, etc., Mar. 15, 90.
Board of Works
Chairmanship;Filling vacant Appointment, Mar. 15, 94.
Loans, Mar. 26, 1376.
Bunagee Pier, Erection of, Mar. 26, 1372.
Child Drunkenness;Number of Arrests, Mar. 19, 408.
Congested Districts Return, Mar. 15, 89.
Sligo, County;Number of Electoral Divisions Scheduled, etc., Mar. 25, 1113.
Congested Districts Board
Galway County Works, Mar. 18, 247.
"Granuaille" Steamer, Annual Repairs, Mar. 25, 1109.
Consolidated Fund (No. 1) Bill, 2R., Mar. 26, 1416, 1418, 1422.
Constabulary, Royal Irish
Down County;Promotion of Roman Catholics, etc., Mar. 19, 418.
Moville Police;Appointment of Roman Catholic Sergeant, Mar. 25, 1108.
Return, Mar. 25, 1118, 1119.
Summer Uniforms, Mar. 26, 1377.
Wallace, Inspector;Retention beyond term of Office, Mar. 18, 246.
County Surveyors, Assistant Surveyors;Local Government Board raising Salaries, Mar. 21, 727.
Dairy Industries, Preservatives, Pasteurisation, etc.;Legislation, Mar. 15, 88.
Derriquin Castle Shooting Party, Mar. 21, 726.
Dromard Petty Sessions;District Inspector Clayton, Number of Attendances, etc., Mar. 21, 728; Mar. 22, 872.
Drug Contracts with Local Government, Mar. 25, 1112, 1113.
Dublin Castle Authorities, Overriding of the Law, Leslie v. Justices of Monaghan, Mar. 15, 124.
Dublic Custom House Examinations, Mar. 25, 1117.
Education
Irish Language in National Schools;Extra Subject Fees, etc., Mar. 25, 1118.
Roxboro' Road School;Premises let to Dean Greg, etc., Mar. 15, 92.
Fermanagh County;Local Government Board increasing Salaries of Local Officials, etc., Mar. 15, 96.
Inquiry proposed, Mar. 18, 250.
Finnigan, P., and Constable Muldowney;Proposed Remission of Sentence, Mar. 18, 242.
Fisheries
Donegal
Boatslip at Araheera, Mar. 22, 873.
Fish Curing Stations, Mar. 25, 1109.
Salmon Nets, Purchase of;Loans, Mar. 26, 1369.
Lough Foyle Salmon Fishing Licences, Mar. 26, 1370.
Poisoning Salmon Spawning Grounds, Mar. 15, 94.
Flax Cultivation;Restrictions as to Flax Water running into Rivers, Mar. 26, 1374.
Greystones Pier and Harbour;Defective Works, County Surveyor's Report, etc., Mar. 15, 97.
Gweebarra Bridge, Repair of, Mar. 25, 1111.
Horse Breeding, Irish;Board of Agriculture and the Selection of Stallions, Mar. 22, 866.
Innishowen Coast, Harbour Accommodation;Proposed Grant, Mar. 22, 868, 869.
Kerry Assizes;Jury Challenging, etc., Mar. 18, 245.
Killydysart District Council;Account due to Mr. M'Inerney, Action of Local Government Board, Mar. 25, 1111.
Kinnagoe Bay, Moville;Improvement of Landing Accommodation, Mar. 26, 1371.
Labourers Act;Labourer living in Cottage belonging to Farmer, Claiming Allowance of Land, Mar. 21, 733.
Labourers' Cottages
Birr;Rejection of Applications, Mar. 15, 89.
Kilmallock District Council;Provisional Order, Mar. 21, 730.
Rural District Councils;Proposed Extension of Powers, Mat: 18, 248.
Stranorlar District;Provisional Order, Mar. 22, 867.
Laud Commission
Dillon Estate, Sale of;Reservation of Sporting Rights, Mar. 15, 97.
Donegal Sub-Land Commission;Date of next Sitting, Mar. 22, 864.
Enniskillen;Date of next Sitting, Mar. 18, 251.
Limerick County;Commissioners raising Rents, etc., Mar. 21, 730.
Land Purchase in Wexford, Mar. 19, 420.
Landed Estates Court;Sale of Estates, Mar. 21, 732; Mar. 26, 1370.
Lifford Bridge, Maintenance of, Mar. 26, 1375.
Limavady Water Supply, Mar. 22, 869.
Live Stock Breeding;Grant to Royal Dublin Society, Mar. 18, 243.
Local Government Rules and Orders;Returns, Mar. 15, 87.
Local Government (Ireland) Act Administration;Policy of the Local Government Board, Increase in Salaries of County Officials Dispute, etc., Mar. 26, 1416, 1427.
Longford
Canal Harbour, Dangerous State of, Mar. 22, 870, 871.
Kilkelly, Mr.;Resident Magistrate, Mar.22, 871.
Lough Neagh Drainage Works, Mar. 21, 732.
Lunatic Asylums
Criminal Lunatics;Cost of Maintenance, Mar. 26, 1379.
Mullingar District Asylum;Increased Expenditure, Mar. 21, 733.
Rate-in-Aid, Delay in Payment, etc Mar. 22, 864; Mar. 26, 1380.
Lurgan Disturbances, Mar. 22, 872.
Mullough;Police Malpractices, Dismissal of Officers, Case of Ryan, Mar. 25, 1257.
National Education Office;Vacancies for Clerks, Mar. 19, 417.
National Library;Number of Assistant Librarians, etc., Mar. 26, 1374.
National School Teachers
Holidays, Curtailment of, Mar 19, 416.
Salaries, Mar. 19, 416.
O'Brien, Mr. K.;Removal of, from Commission of the Peace, Mar. 25,1115, 1116, 1117.
Omagh District Cemetery;Loan, Closing Drumrarh Burial Ground, etc., Mar. 15, 91.
Ormond, Lower, Electoral Divisions;Transfer to Borrisokane Union, Mar. 18, 244.
Ph&#x0153;nix Park;Use of for Military Purposes, Extending Area, etc., Mar. 15, 90.
Poor Law Medical Officers' Holidays;Action of Local Government Board, Mar. 21, 727.
Poor Law Superannuation Bill;Charge on Local Rates, Mar. 19, 417.
Portadown Disturbances, Mar. 18, 251;
Mar. 21, 736; Mar. 25, 1257; Mar. 26, 1377, 1378.
Potatoes, Electro-Culture of, Mar. 21, 731.
Queen Victoria's Funeral, Day of General Mourning;Publicans Compelled by Police to Close, etc., Mar. 18, 247.
Queen's Colleges, Cost, etc., Mar. 18, 246.
Reformatory and Industrial Schools;Lord Lieutenant's Order, Mar. 25, 1256.
Rural District Council Account Audits;Fees, Mar. 21, 734.
Shillelagh Union
Bolster, Dr., Charges against;Inquiry by Dr. Flinn, Mar. 21, 731.
Joyce, Nurse, Charges against;Names of Witnesses, Mar. 15, 92; Mar. 18, 252.
Sneem Pier;Goods Store, Erection of Mar. 21, 726.
Stewartstown;St. Patrick's Day Meeting, Mar. 15, 95.
Thomastown
Petty Sessions District;Number of Protestant Magistrates, Mar 15,93.
Sanitation;Local Government Board Inspectors, etc., Mar. 15, 93.
Valuations at Banteer;Traders' Premises, Mar. 19, 420.
Westport Petty Sessions;Contempt of Court, Case of Mrs. Salmon, Mar. 26, 1373.
Wexford County Officials' Salaries Dispute;Appeal, etc.
Affording Opportunity for Discussion, Mar. 18, 244; Mar. 19, 421.
Local Government Circular, etc., Mar. 22, 865.
White Estate;Date of Sale, Mar. 26,1375.
Workhouses
Amalgamation;Number Amalgamated since 1888, etc., Mar. 22, 865.
Bailieborough Union Ambulance;Payment for Horsing, Mar. 25, 1114.
Carrickmacross Workhouse Dietary;Action of Local Government Board, Mar. 21, 728.
Rate-in-Aid, Mar. 21, 729.
Trained Nurses, Appointment of, Mar. 21, 727, 733; Mar. 22, 866, 867.
Y
Yang-tsze
see China;Anti-Foreign Rising.
Yeomanry
Disbandment of Regiments below required Strength, etc.
Q. Capt. Bagot; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 26, 1351.
Discipline
Os. Col. Brookfield, Mar. 15, 167; Lord Stanley, 178.
Imperial
Objections to term "Imperial"
O. Sir J. Colomb, Mar. 15, 160.
Raising;Co-operation of the Colonies.
O. Mr. Lee, Mar. 15, 147.
Marching Allowances;Yeoman residing beyond Borders of County, etc.
Q. Mr. Seely; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 22, 851.
South African War, see that title.
Training;Conditions
Q. Mr. Carlile; A. Mr. Brodrick, Mar. 15,62; Q. Mr. Stock; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 19, 399.
Army Order;Date of Publication
Q. Mr. Stock; A. Lord Stanley, Mar. 21, 700.
Yerburgh, Mr. R. A. [Chester]
China
Railway Concession, Canton to Hankau;Transference to Belgian Syndicate, Mar. 19, 405.
Yang-tsze Viceroys, Reforms;Introduction of, Mar. 21, 707.
Ladysmith Correspondence, Mar. 15, 62.
Swiss Military System;Publishing Information, etc., Mar. 15, 66.
York, Archbishop of
Intoxicating Liquor (Sale to Travellers) Bill, 2R., Mar. 21, 659.
Young, Com. O. [Berks, Wokingham]
Navy
Belleville Boilers, Mar. 23, 996.
Education and Training of Naval Officers, Mar. 23, 997.
Officers' Leave, Mar. 23, 999.
Recruiting, Mar. 25, 1148.
Roman Catholic Chaplains, Mar. 23, 997.
Shipbuilding Programme Delays, Mar. 23, 995.
Warrant Officers
Pay Mar. 25, 1148.
Status of, Mar. 23, 998.
Watering of Battleships, Mar. 23, 999.
Young, Mr. S. [Cavan, E.]
Bailieborough Union Ambulance;Payment for Horsing, Mar. 25, 1114.
Civil List Committee;Publication of Confidential Documents, Mar. 18, 256.
Roman Catholic Chaplains in the Navy, Position of, Mar. 21, 756.
Yoxall, Mr. J. H. [Nottingham, W.]
Army Schools
Conditions of Service;Suicide of Aldershot Schoolmaster, Mar. 21, 701.
Departmental Committee, Mar. 25, 1093.
Civil Service;Unestablished Service counting towards Pension, Mar. 21, 723.
Education
Heckmondwike School of Science;Charging Pees, Mar. 25, 1102, 1103.
Training Colleges;Appointment of Committee, Mar. 25, 1103.
Land Commission Clerks;Pay, Mar. 21, 722.
Wallasey Improvement Bill, Instruction to Committee, Mar. 21, 679.
Z
Zanzibar
Slave Trade
Debate in Com. of Supply, Mar. 19, 479
Emancipation of Slaves, Facilitating, etc.
Q. Mr. H. Lewis; A. Vise. Cranborne, Mar. 25, 1099.
Number of Slaves freed 1898&#x2013;1900 etc.
Q. Mr. T. Bayley; A. Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mar. 18, 225.