LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Wednesday, 25th September, 1901. Third Reading-Miners' Rights Fees-Library Ac- commodation-Law Amendment Bill-Counties Act Amendment Bill-Statutes Compilation Bill -Miners' Rights Fee Reduction Bill-Shops and Shop - assis ants Bill - Cigarette - smoking by Youths Prohibition Bill. The Hon. the SPEAKER took the chair at half-past two o'clock. PRAYERS. THIRD READING. Invercargill Reserve Leasing Bill. MINERS' RIGHTS FEES. On the motion of the Hon. Mr. BOLT, it was ordered, That there be laid on the table of the Council a return showing the amount of fees paid in respect of miners' rights during the years 1898, 1899, and 1900, the amount for each year to be stated separately. LIBRARY ACCOMMODATION. The Hon. Mr. RIGG moved, That the report of the Joint Library Committee of the 19th September, 1501. be agreed to, namely : "That all the accommodation within the outside library doors be devoted to library business." The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER only wished to say that he was quite certain every member of Parliament must feel very much pleased at the management of the new library. It was true that certain old associations had been destroyed by removal from places that were 
<page:704>
doar to members through ancient usage and habit. But still, that being admitted, the new library was a very creditable institution, and he thought it might also be admitted that it was fairly well managed. He agreed with the report that they had not got too much room inside the library for their own work, and that it would be a mistake to put other work inside there. Therefore, while he agreed with the report, he thought it was only fair to say that the Council was satisfied with the way in which the new management were conducting library matters. Motion agreed to. LAW AMENDMENT BILL. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 4 .- " When a contract is proposed be- tween parties at a distance, the acceptance of the proposal shall be deemed null and void when the revocation of the acceptance has been communicated to the proposer before the acceptance, or at the same time with it." The Hon. Mr. A. LEE SMITH moved the excision of this clause. The Committee divided on the question, "That the clause stand part of the Bill." # AYES, 15. Barnicoat Jones Taiaroa Tomoana Bolt Montgomery Morris Bowen Twomey. Walker, W. C. Feld wick Rigg Jenkinson Williams. Shrimski NOES, 14. Arkwright Louisson Scotland Smith, A. L. Gourley Ormond Pinkerton Harris Swanson Walker, L. Kelly, W. Pitt Reeves Kenny Majority for, 1. Amendment negatived, and clause agreed to. Clause 8 .- " In an action for damages for breach of promise of marriage, not more than five hundred and fifty pounds shall be recover- able as damages except where the plaintiff, being a woman, proves to the satisfaction of the Court or the jury (where there is a jury) that she has been seduced by the defendant." The Committee divided on the question, " That the clause stand part of the Bill." AYES, 7. Barnicoat Smith, A. L. Tomoana Walker, W. C. Bolt Taiaroa Feldwick NOES, 18. Bowen Kelly, W. Reeves Gourley Rigg Montgomery Harris Shrimski Morris Jenkinson Ormond Swanson Walker, L. Jennings Pinkerton Jones Pitt Williams. Majority against, 11. Clause struck out. Clause 9 .- " In any action or other proceed- ing for the administration of any estate, com- Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker menced after the passing of this Act, no Court or Judge shall have jurisdiction to order or allow payment of costs out of the estate to the party responsible for the commencement or continuance of such action unless the Court or Judge shall first certify that there was some necessity for the action being commenced or continued, and, if any costs are allowed, then only to the extent to which such continuance was necessary." The Hon. Mr. A. LEE SMITH moved, That the clause be struck out. The Committee divided on the question, "That the clause be a clause of the Bill." AYES, 8. Jenkinson Barnicoat Rigg Bolt Jennings Swanson. Feldwick Jones NOES, 14. Ormond Taiaroa Bowen Walker, L. Pinkerton Gourley Walker, W. C. Pitt Harris Reeves Montgomery Williams. Smith, A. L. Morris Majority agains', 6. Amendment agreed to, and clause struck out. Bill reported. COUNTIES ACT AMENDMENT BILL. The Hon. Mr. BOWEN .- Sir, this is a short Bill to amend an error of omission in an Act passed in 1899. Some time ago what was the south branch of the Waimakariri, in Canterbury, broke through Stewart's Gully and cut off a portion of the Avon Road Board, and thereby threw it for all practical purposes into the Eyreton district. A Bill was passed in 1899 to give the Governor in Council, " on the request of the several local authorities hereinafter mentioned," power to amend the boundaries of the Avon district and the Eyreton district, and of the Counties of Selwyn and Ashley, so far as was necessary. But it was found afterwards that the " local authorities " should have been defined in the Bill, and that the rights of the Waimakariri River Board should have been specifically guarded. Section 3 of the Act of 1899 is amended by inserting, after the words " local authorities," the words " of the several road districts and counties," thus limiting the local authorities to these ; and, then, the 3rd clause of the Bill now before the Council pro- vides that nothing contained in the Act of 1899 shall be deemed to interfere with the jurisdiction of the South Waimakariri River Board. That is practically the whole Bill. As I said before, it is really to amend a slight error in the drafting of the Act of 1899. I beg to move the second reading of the Bill. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER. - I only wish to say that the Bill has been very properly ex- plained by the Hon. Mr. Bowen, and that it is only to give effect to previous legislation. Bill read the second time. 
<page:705>
STATUTES COMPILATION BILL. The Hon. Mr. PINKERTON .- Sir, I think this will be found to be a very useful Bill. It is not a consolidating measure, but still it has the effect of bringing together the law and its amendments, if this Council or the other House so desires it. Sections 2 and 3 are really the whole Bill, and explain themselves. I could read these sections, but I do not think it is necessary. It is simply this : We know that a certain law and its amendments may be spread over a number of statutes, and it is very diffi- .cult at times to know where they are and how to get them. This Bill simply says that this -Council or the other House may by resolution -order certain Acts to be printed and brought together, so that all the members, or, rather, the whole country, shall know what the law is. I -do not think I need go any further than that, and I move the second reading of the Bill. Bill read the second time. # MINERS' RIGHTS FEE REDUCTION BILL. The Hon. Mr. REEVES .- Sir, I wish to say a very few words in regard to this Bill. The Bill has passed through another place, where it met with approval and was not at all opposed. Under it a certain amount of relief will be given to the working miner, or the men who are generally known as "hatters," on the goldfields. In 1885 the fee was reduced to 5s., but after that it was increased to 10s. Now it is proposed to reduce it to 5s. again, and, as I said just now, the Bill has gone through the other House and the Goldfields Committee. I  now beg to move the second reading of the Bill. Bill read the second time. SHOPS AND SHOP-ASSISTANTS BILL. The Hon. Colonel PITT .- Sir, the short ob- ject of this Bill is to provide a half-holiday for the chemists, and it puts the law back pretty .much as it was in the year 1894, because by the amending Act, " The Shops and Shop-assistants Act, 1895," chemists' shops were excepted from those ordered to be closed for the weekly half- holiday. The whole of the chemists in the principal towns of the colony are. I understand, in favour of this Bill, and I believe they have addressed the Hon. the Minister of Education in reference to the Shops and Offices Bill in the direction in which this Bill goes. Of course, -chemists recognise that they are to a certain extent the servants of the public, and that they . should keep their shops open at such hours as will enable them to meet the exigencies of acci- dents and sickness, and that is provided for in section 3 of the Bill. I trust that the Bill will. be allowed to be read the second time, and I think there should really be no objection to it. Therefore I content myself with moving the second reading. The Hon. Mr. FELDWICK .- Sir, I have much pleasure in supporting the Hon Colonel Pitt as regards this Bill. It appears to me that if chemists' shops are to be closed, an accident may at any time occur and be most disastrous to the sick persons. I think certain exemp- tions ought to take place. I understand that in the country of which Bucharest is the capital, arrangements are made by which a chemist's shop is open at all hours of the night in proper rotation ; and I believe that the rota- tion of these shops is always properly notified in the newspapers of the city. It must appeal to every honourable gentleman that it is neces- sary that some one or more chemist's shops should be available at all periods of the day. No one can tell when an accident may occur ; no one can say when an accident may happen to any one of the gentlemen sitting here in this honourable Council at the present moment ; and, if it happened at a shut up time, the necessary medicines might not be obtainable, and serious results might follow. So, Sir, I think this Bill is a good one. If there are any defects in the Bill, they certainly can be remedied in Committee. Then, as regards the Shops and Offices Bill, another measure before us-into which amendments having the effect of this Bill might be introduced in Committee - it may not pass through all its stages and through all the differences in respect to particular clauses between the two Houses ; but I think honour- able gentlemen might regard this Bill as a matter of urgency, and, as being in the in- terests of the public health, and as a safeguard of the public weal, it is something which I think we ought to attend to, and which we ought to pass. Sir, I have much pleasure in seconding the motion for the second reading of the Bill. The Hon. Mr. RIGG .- I think this Bill is one which the Council might very well pass. I can- not understand why the Bill has been drafted in the form in which it is. It seems to me to be simply repeating certain sections of the Act of 1894, which Act has never been repealed ; and it would be a much simpler Bill if it had con- sisted of one clause, to this effect: that sub- section (a) of section 7 of the Act of 1895 be repealed. That would be exactly what is re- quired. At the present time chemists are ex- empted from closing, and, of course, it is in their option whether they will open their shops and carry on their business or not ; but that has one disadvantage which has been found to exist by the chemists, and that is that it leaves the way open for perhaps one chemist in a place to keep his shop open and thus prevent the rest of the chemists in the same place having a half-holiday. I think there is a neces- sity for this Bill, and I hope it will pass. The Hon. Mr. TWOMEY .- I cannot see why chemists should not close like other people. They close on Sundays at present, and we never hear any complaint of any great inconvenience caused by such closing. Of course, they open on certain hours on Sundays, and this Bill pro- vides that they shall open on half-holidays in the forenoon and between seven and nine o'clock in the evening. I am, of course, only referring to the clause objected to in this Bill. I think that is sufficient ; but I cannot see why a fishmonger, fruiterer, or confectioner should be exempted. Anybody can lay in sufficient 
<page:706>
fish during the first half of the day for the last half of the day. The Hon. Mr. FELDWICK .- If you went to Bucharest what would you do ? The Hon. Mr. TWOMEY .- If I went into a hotel I should expect that the hotelkeeper would provide enough fish for me during the forenoon to do for the afternoon. In the same way, I cannot see why people cannot lay in sufficient fruit in the forenoon to do them for the afternoon. An Hon. MEMBER .- What about physic ? The Hon. Mr. TWOMEY .- I have dealt with the question of physic. In the same way, I cannot see why people should not lay in suffi- cient confectionery in the forenoon to do them for the afternoon. I have never been able to see any good ground for exempting these people from the operations of the half-holiday closing. When the time comes, if it is put to the test, I shall vote for removing these exemptions from the Bill. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- I must say that I have some sympathy with the remarks made by the Hon. Mr. Feldwick-that is, that chemists might very easily arrange amongst themselves a certain rota in each part of a town for closing. I may say that I am familiar with the arrangements made in a city a good deal bigger than any city in New Zealand. I am referring to a time over thirty years ago, and to a city in South America. It was not a British town ; it was inhabited by people of a nationality that Britishers usually look down upon ; but in that city they had certain regula- tions with respect to doctors, chemists, and midwives. Every morning you saw in the morning paper an advertisement stating which doctor was on duty that night, which chemist was on duty that night, and which midwives were on duty that night, and that applied not only to the city generally, but to each quarter of the city ; and the other doctors, chemists, or midwives, of course, went off duty on that par- ticular night. And that is the spirit in which I think we should regulate our affairs in a matter of this kind. I am quite prepared to give chemists every reasonable facility. They certainly should get their holidays like every- body else ; but, considering that they are obliged to assist at any time for the sake of preserving human life, I think they ought to regulate their affairs in such an intelligent way that the public should know that they can always get assistance in times of sickness. The Hon. Mr. PINKERTON .- I should like to say this: that the master chemists in Dunedin are all in favour of this Bill. They want to get away like other people for their half-holiday. The chemists close on Sunday, and every night, and no great harm happens. But if there should be any case of emergency there are always certain chemists who live on the premises, and they can be rung up or called on on Sunday, or on any other night in the week ; and they are quite willing to arrange amongst themselves that this should be done- that there should be a rota. That might be very well left to themselves. I have received a Hon. Mr. Twomey number of telegrams and letters from employers in Dunedin in favour of passing a Bill of this kind. I shall support this Bill. The Hon. Mr. BOLT .- I may say that the same opinion is held by the chemists in Wel- lington. I have here a resolution which was passed at a meeting held conjointly by the employés and the employers. This resolution emanates from both parties. It is as fol- lows :- " Resolved, That the master chemists ap- prove fifty-four hours as the week's work of an assistant, provided the stipulated hours be subject to arrangement between employers and employés. That the meeting recommends the Government to make the statutory half- holi- day compulsory upon chemists, with provision for opening between the hours of seven and nine p.m .; also, that provision be made for the compulsory closing of chemists' shops at eight p.m. on four days of the week, other than Saturday and the statutory holiday ; and that chemists be allowed to open on Sundays and holidays only between the hours of half-past nine and half-past ten a.m., and seven and nine p.m." So you see the feeling is quite unanimous, not only in Dunedin, but also in Wellington. The Hon. Mr. JENNINGS .- The Hon. Mr. Bolt has just stated what I was about to put before the Council. I have received a similar circular to that referred to by the honourable gentleman. But I am not altogether satisfied with section 3. It is stated there : " All chemists' shops may be opened for the supply of medicines and surgical appliances only be- tween the hours of seven and nine o'clock in the evening, but not longer." The Hon. Colonel PITT .- On the day ap- pointed for the closing of shops. The Hon. Mr. JENNINGS .- Yes ; but sup- posing a case of croup arose at ten o'clock, or two o'clock in the morning, and a child was thus suddenly taken ill, what would be the position of the parent who knocked up a chemist to get medicine under those circum- stances? It would be quite contrary to the provision of this clause to supply medicine after the hour named. An Hon. MEMBER. - What is the case now ? The Hon. Mr. JENNINGS .- That is what I want to know. The chemist can only supply medicine between the hours that are specified in this clause. I assume if he went beyond that, and if an Inspector was inclined to be objec- tionable, it is quite possible that the chemist might be held to have infringed the Act. This shows how difficult it is to make regulations in regard to chemists, where questions of serious illness come in and death may result. The Hon. Mr. JONES .- I suppose, Sir. there will be scarcely any difference of opinion as to the desirableness of exempting some shop- keepers from closing on the day appointed for the half-holiday. Of course, fish, and pastry. and fruit, and that sort of thing are perishable, and if they are not used up at once the shop- keeper may sustain more or less loss. 
<page:707>
The Hon. Mr. TWOMEY. - What about Sunday ? The Hon. Mr. JONES .- That is a matter we cannot deal with now. I think there really ought to be some exemptions in the case of the shopkeepers who have perishable goods on hand and who might lose by them, which, of course, would be a very grievous thing. But there can be no doubt that medicine should be available at all hours. I quite agree with the remarks made by the Hon. Mr. Feldwick in that re- spect ; but medicine is not available at all hours now. If arrangements could be made whereby the chemists could be induced to adopt the sys- tem of rota, which was suggested by the Hon. Mr. Feldwick and the Minister of Education, I think it would be admirable; but the diffi culty is, of course, that the chemists would not be likely to trouble themselves about it unless the State interfered and said this system must be established. The case brought up by the Hon. Mr. Jennings is one that might happen at any time; and, in fact, cases of that sort do happen now-that is, medicine may be wanted in a great hurry, possibly at most inconvenient hours. An Hon. MEMBER .- You can get medicine at the hospital at any time. The Hon. Mr. JONES .- It is not everybody that can go to the hospital. It may be miles away from the person who is wanting the medi- cine. Even if you had a rota which would necessitate one or two chemists in different parts of the town keeping open throughout the night, still the medicine might be at a con- siderable distance from the person who would  require it. But, though we cannot have a system for the supply of medicine that would be absolutely perfect, I am of opinion that we ought to have some State interference in order to see that medicine is available when required by the public, because there is no doubt now there are hours during the night when medi- cine cannot be procured except with very great difficulty, and perhaps may not be procured at all. So far as I am concerned, I quite approve of the Bill. The Hon. Colonel PITT .- Sir, I should have deemed it quite unnecessary to reply at all except for the remark made by the Hon. Mr. Jennings. I would like to point out to the honourable gentleman that there is nothing in the objection he has raised. If anybody is taken ill at three o'clock in the morning, there is nothing whatever to prevent a chemist supply- ing him with medicine, as that time is before noon on the particular day. If it happened before midnight, this Bill provides that on the afternoon of the day on which his shop is to be closed the chemist may supply any medicine or surgical appliances which are urgently re- quired. He may open his shop merely for such purposes. It is only a question whether you can rouse a chemist up during the night of the closing-day just the same as on other nights. I am not going to detain the Council now, but I think this question of the chemists closing was very fully gone into before the Labour Bills Committee last year, and certain sugges- tions were made then. Supposing the whole of the chemists' shops were closed, possibly some arrangements might be made in the direction then indicated. That is all I wish to say about it, and I shall not detain the Council further in the matter. Bill read the second time. CIGARETTE-SMOKING BY YOUTHS PROHIBITION BILL. On the question, 'hat this Bill be committed, The Hon. Mr. FELDWICK said, When the second reading of this Bill was moved, I moved as an amendment that the Bill be read a second time that day three months. Circumstances caused me to be absent from the Council at that time-seven hundred miles away-and so I was not able to take charge of it. The Bill, of course, was too stringent, and I certainly be- lieved, and do still hold, that the Bill was sprung upon us because certain ladies who were enthusiastic on certain subjects had induced my honourable friend Colonel Pitt to take the Bill up. There was a debate on that occasion, and my honourable friend Mr. George Jones read us some opinions of Dr. Forbes Winslow, the great lunacy doctor, as regards cigarette- smoking. I was bold enough on that occasion to state my opinion that the cigarette, when a man made it himself and made sure he was using good tobacco, was about the most healthy kind of smoking in which one could indulge, and that the cabbage-leaf cigar was the most ob- jectionable thing to smoke, and that filthy pipes, such as some gentlemen I know smoke, are still more objectionable. Now, my honourable friend Mr. Jones read some statements made by this great lunacy doctor, Mr. Forbes Winslow, who traced lunacy in a very large degree to the practice of cigarette-smoking. Well, Sir, I agree with that honourable gentleman to a certain extent, in that the smoking of certain kinds of cigarettes is hurtful and most ob- jectionable. There can be no doubt but that there is very little or no tobacco in these pro- ductions. They are made of very thin paper, sprayed with nicotine and Goodness knows what, and remind one of the cane that boys used to smoke in our early days. Boys will smoke in some shape or form, and I said at that time that if the Adulteration Act vere properly enforced nothing but good tobacco could be used, and nothing could be sold to boys as it appears is sold in Christchurch and in Wellington for 3d. a packet. I do not wish to oppose the honourable gentleman's Bill any further than this, because I understand he is willing to take out of the Bill a clause which proposes a whipping for the third offence. But, Sir, since then I have fallen across something which I wish to put into Hansard regarding the respective merits of the dirty pipe, the cabbage cigar, and adulterated cigarette. My honourable friend when he last spoke quoted something from Dr. Forbes Winslow, and I suggested he had cut it from a "liver pill " advertisement or something of that sort. Now, I have something here which goes to show the opposite, namely,- 
<page:708>
" An article in the Lancet on nicotine has a direct bearing upon a subject that is now engaging the attention of the New Zealand Legislature. Many people will learn with sur- prise that the great medical journal inverts the order of injuriousness usually associated with cigarettes, cigars, and pipes. It states that nicotine itself has been proved to be practically guiltless of evil effects in smoking, but pyridine and its derivatives are responsible for headaches, trembling, and giddiness. The degree of toxicity in smoke depends largely on the completeness The combustion of a cigarette of combustion. is more complete than that of a pipe or cigar. A pipe acts as a condenser, but the condensed products do not reach the mouth, while con- siderable condensation must occur in the cigar, the products reaching the mouth and being absorbed. Therefore the Lancet places the cigar first in the order of injuriousness, then the pipe, and lastly the cigarette." And if you smoke a cigarette with a mouth- piece, in my opinion it is a clean smoke every time; and, if you make it from good tobacco yourself, it comes out something like what the Frenchman said about coffee, "You must buy it yourself, you must grind it yourself, you must roast it yourself, you must drink it yourself." The Hon. Mr. BOLT .- I do not see why we should go to medical advice in a question of this sort. Every sensible man knows that, more especially in regard to youths, this is a beastly habit, which may be productive of a great deal of evil. We know that the habit very frequently leads to excess, and thereby becomes dangerous ; and, that being so, I fail to see why there should be any hesitancy in preventing boys below the age of sixteen from smoking. My only feeling in the matter is that this Bill is only dealing with the fringe of the subject. It should have dealt with the whole question of smoking, and I understand that in another place a Bill has been intro- duced disallowing every form of tobacco- smoking by youths of this age, and that, to my mind, is the measure we should have had in this Council. I am perfectly indifferent whether this Bill passes or not in its present shape. The Hon. Mr. JONES .- I think it is neces- sary one should give reasons for supporting this Bill. The honourable gentleman who has just sat down has very properly said that the Bill should have gone a little further, and pro- hibited tobacco-smoking in any form. That is a legitimate course to take ; but I am quite willing to take a half- or quarter-loaf of bread when I cannot get a whole one, and I think this Bill goes in the right direction. The Hon. Mr. Feldwick gave us nothing but a rhapsody on cigarettes. Cigarettes, according to his idea, are all one needs in this life He would give them to his infants and to his grown-up children, and he smokes them himself. I am inclined to conclude that he puts them on the table, and smokes them in bed. and out of bed- asleep and awake-always cigarettes, cigarettes. I do not think the honourable gentleman's view of this matter is acceptable. Now, we Hon. Mr. Feldwick adults, and therefore we cast no reflection on adults who are in the habit of smoking cigar- ettes, cigars, or pipes. We are dealing with cigarette-smoking by children, and I think we are acting wisely in considering this matter from a serious point of view. The Hon. Mr. FELDWICK .- That is what I was doing. The Hon. Mr. JONES. - The honourable gentleman, I feel sure, was doing nothing of the sort. He discredited the authority of the great expert I quoted in regard to the in- juriousness of cigarettec -smoking; and the honourable gentleman should not have dis- credited it without showing some cause why. The question we are dealing with, to put the matter in a nutshell, is cigarette-smoking by youths. Is it not detrimental, both physically and morally ? Undoubtedly it is; and, that being the case, we ought to support this measure. The Hon Colonel PITT ..- I would like to say, in reply to the Hon. Mr. Bolt, that if it is the mind of this Council to make this Bill apply to smoking in all forms it can easily be done by the addition of five words in section 2, making the section read this way : "Every per- son who sells, gives, or supplies any cigarette or tobacco in any form." I merely wish to say, further, I cannot understand why the Hon. Mr. Feldwick is so impressed with the idea that I must have been moved to introduce this Bill at the instance of a number of ladies. The honourable gentleman is quite mistaken. What induced me to introduce this Bill was the same, I suppose, as has induced every honourable gentleman to give expression to the views they did, and that is seeing young lads about the streets smoking cigarettes, because honestly I believe it is detrimental to their physical health and development. That was my motive, and there was no other reason whatever. Motion agreed to. IN COMMITTEE. Clause 2 .- " Every person who sells, gives, or supplies any cigarette to any youth under the age of seventeen years shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against the provisions of this Act, and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to a penalty of not exceeding ten pounds." The Hon. Mr. BOLT moved to insert, after " cigarette," the words "or tobacco in any form." The Hon. Mr. FELDWICK moved, That the Chairman do leave the chair. The Committee divided. AYES, 4. Ormond Feldwick Gourley Pinkerton. NOES, 15. Smith, W. C. Barnicoat Morris Bolt Pitt Swanson Reeves Jennings Twomey Walker, W. C. Jones Rigg Louisson Smith, A. L. Williams. Majority against, 11. 
<page:709>
Motion negatived, and amendment agreed to. anxious to resume my duties, but my medical The Hon. Mr. RIGG moved the excision of adviser forbids me to leave the warm climate the word "seventeen," with a view to substi- tuting the word " fifteen " in lieu thereof. The Committee divided on the question, "That the word stand part of the clause." AYES, 11. Pinkerton Twomey Gourley Walker, W. C. Jennings Pitt Williams. Jones Reeves Ormond Smith, W. C. NOES, 8. Louisson Smith, A. L. Barnicoat Swanson Morris Bolt amongst us. Rigg Feldwick Majority for, 3. Word retained. The Hon. Mr. RIGG moved the excision of the word "ten," with a view to substituting the word " five " in lieu thereof. ment to move, and one which would commend The Committee divided on the question, "That the word stand part of the clause." AYES, 14. Morris Swanson Barnicoat amendment was to strike out all the words Ormond Twomey Bolt Walker, W. C. Pitt Jennings Reeves Williams. Jones Smith, W. C. Louisson NOES, 5. Smith, A. L. Pinkerton Feldwick Gourley Rigg Majority for, 9. Word retained.  Bill reported. The Council adjourned at a quarter to ten o'clock p.m. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Wednesday, 25th September, 1901. First Reading +-Mr. Speaker-Supply. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER took the chair at half- past two o'clock. PRAYERS. FIRST READINGS. Education Boards Election Bill, Cornwall Park Duties Exemption Bill, New Zealand University Bill, Waimate Hospital District Bill. MR. SPEAKER. Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER .- I desire to read a letter from the Hon. the Speaker : -- "Jermyn Street, Auckland, 21st September, 1901. "Members of the House of Representatives. "I REGRET to say that I have been compelled He hoped there would be no prolonged debate. by my illness to absent myself for a longer time than I expected, and I must ask for leave be taken as a want of confidence motion. of absence for a short period longer. I am of Auckland at present. I hope, however, to be in my place again very shortly ; in the mean- time I must claim the indulgence of the House .- Yours faithfully, "G. MAURICE O'RORKE, Speaker, House of Representatives." Sir J. G. WARD (Minister for Railways) .- I move, That a fortnight's leave of absence be granted to Mr. Speaker on account of sickness ; and I am sure honourable members will agree with me in saying we hope Sir Maurice will soon be restored to his former state of health, and that we shall shortly have him back again Motion agreed to. SUPPLY. On the question, That the House do resolve itself into Committee of Supply, Mr. LAWRY (Parnell) said he had an amend- itself to the good-sense of the House, and which might have the effect, perhaps, of hurling the Government from the Treasury benches. His after " That," and insert the following : "with a view of shortening the session, and in order that during the session members may have the benefit of a more genial climate than Wellington, the next session of Parliament be held in the City or suburbs of Auckland." An Hon. MEMBER .- Sydenham. Mr. LAWRY said that Sydenham was out of the running altogether. Honourable members would recognise that there was no originality in an amendment of this nature. Session after session an honourable member who had represented Sydenham had moved that the seat of Government be changed to that locality, but he had not been successful in carrying the amendment. He had no desire in proposing this amendment to cast a single aspersion upon Wellington. They knew that Wellington must necessarily be the most important commercial centre of the colony, but they had all realised, during this session especially, that members had been suffering from the very bad climatic in- fluence of the city. He realised that the House and country knew that Auckland was the proper site for the seat of Government. The seat of Government had been unjustly taken from Auckland, and his object was to get restored to the people of Auckland what had been politically stolen from them. Sir J. G. WARD (Minister for Railways) would not discuss the proposal, as the present time was not opportune to do so, but he hoped the honourable member who had moved the amendment, having given expression to his desire to have the meeting of Parliament held in Auckland, would be satisfied to take a division upon it and end it, because they wanted to get to the business of the estimates. Mr. MASSEY wished to know if this would Sir J. G. WARD. - No. 
<page:710>
was his intention to move a further amendment, because he ventured to believe this would be carried. There was a much more genial climate than that of Auckland to be found in this colony, and there was no danger in the locality he referred to that members would suffer from bubonic plague or other evils that had been present in Auckland City. He would move, That Palmerston South be in future the seat of Government, which was a charming spot, very healthy, and beautifully situated. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said it would serve the Government jolly well right if those honourable gentlemen who sat with him took up the rest of the afternoon in useless, idle talk. No doubt this amendment by the honour- able member for Parnell had been inspired for some strategic purpose, and for the acting. leader of the House to express a devout wish that there should be no useless discussion, and that they should get on with the business, when the object of the amendment was so obvious on the face of it ; was simply humbug. It would serve him jolly well right if the House took up the gage and prevented them a little further from going into Supply. There were no points in such tactics. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) was bound to say there were no points in these tactics. He did not mind being outpaced in tactics, using the phrase employed by the Minister for Rail- ways a few days ago, but he objected to be con- sidered a fool who could be taken in by such an obvious device as this. It would -to use his colleague's expression - serve the Government jolly well right if the House devoted all the  afternoon and all the night to debating this amendment. That would settle the question whether it was wise of the Government to put up a member of the Government party to move such an amendment in future. He was quite prepared to go into Committee at once, without any nonsense of this kind, but let them treat the business of the House in a business- like way. He had a little bag of tricks which he could use when wanted; but he objected to being written down an ass. He knew as much of the forms and tactics of the House as any one, and if half a dozen mem- bers took it into their heads to keep this matrer going the whole afternoon no one would be to blame but the instigators of the amendment, whoever they might be. He knew the honourable member for Parnell had his uses, and he supposed this was one of them. But, if they were going to select a more suitable place in which to hold the sittings of Parlia- ment, why not go to the beautiful little City of Napier ? Many of them were now in a position to speak with authority of the suitability of Napier. Captain RUSSELL (Hawke's Bay). - We have a very fine Town Hall at Hastings. Mr. FISHER said the members to whom he referred had just visited the City of Hastings, and also Napier. They had carefully inspected each of those cities. They had also inspected ings of Napier eclipsed the attractions of them all. Why, the very streets of Napier, on which the traffic was conducted, were far superior to the so-called footpaths of Wellington. There were avenues of trees, there was the Marine Parade, there was the superb Cathedral, a delightful seashore; and how could anything truthfully be said of the Empire City after a visit to the City of Napier? He was not jest- ing. If one wanted a change which would delight the hearts of every member, let them have one year's session at Napier. The honour- able member for Napier would, he felt sure, lend every aid to the proposal. The next time the honourable member for Parnell had any such suggestion to make he would recommend him to consult those he thought he was going to delude, and they might give him a little useful advice. The honourable gentleman had played many parts. At one time he wanted the salaries of the Wellington members distinguished from the honorarium paid to other members. He was sorry he had not proceeded further with that proposition when he brought it before the House. So far as he understood, there was no objection at all to the amendment, and the best thing they could do was to carry it ; that would carry out the wishes of the Government in suggesting an amendment which he understood the honourable member to say the Government wished him to propose that afternoon. His view was that there ought to be a change, and if there was to be a change they ought to go to Napier. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) objected to the Government putting up one of their own sup- porters to intercept Supply at a time when the House was prepared to go on with business, and for more reasons than one. One reason was that this was the day set apart by the Standing Orders for the business of private members, and the Government ruthlessly took from the private members that privilege. There was more in the discussion started by the Government in this way than merely the amendment moved by the honourable member for Parnell, because members would know that every subject could be debated on a motion to go into Supply, even without an amendment, and by putting up one of their supporters to move this amendment they invited discussion, not on the amendment alone, but on the whole proceedings of Parliament and every- thing connected with it. If there had been any tendency shown on the part of members to move an amendment on going into Supply, there might have been some excuse for what the Government had done. But, after the Speaker had put the motion, not a single mem- ber made any attempt to intercept Supply. Surely that ought to have been a sufficient lesson to the Government. Yet in spite of that they put up one of their faithful sup- porters, who would not even contradict the statement that it was done to please the Government-to cause what they must know would be a useless discussion and waste of time of the House. There might be points in it 
<page:711>
City (Mr. Fisher) did not see. The House divided on the question, 3.0 "That the words proposed to be omitted be retained." AYES, 34. Fraser, A. L. D. Rhodes Allen, E. G. Russell, G. W. Fraser, W. Allen, J. Russell, W. R. Graham Atkinson Smith, G. J. Hall-Jones Bennet Buddo Steward Hardy Tanner Hornsby Carncross McGowan Ward Carroll Collins McGuire Willis. Meredith Duncan Millar Ell Tellers. Hall Mills Fisher Flatman Parata Stevens. NOES, 28. Palmer Arnold Kaihau Barclay Pirani Lang Bollard Laurenson Symes Thompson, R. Lethbridge Colvin Thomson, J. W. Fowlds Massey Mackenzie, T. Witheford. Gilfedder Mckenzie, R. Haselden McNab Tellers. Heke Herries Houston Monk Hutcheson Napier Lawry. Majority against, 6. Amendment negatived, and motion agreed to, and the House resolved itself into Committee of Supply. IN COMMITTEE. CLASS II .- COLONIAL SECRETARY'S DEPART-  MENT. Office of Industries and Commerce, £3,908. Mr. G. J. SMITH (Christchurch City) said that this department was set up with the object of assisting the industries and commerce of the colony, yet, though it had been in existence for some years, he was not aware that a great deal had been done. He believed the department could be made very useful, but it should be galvanised into life. He wished to call atten- tion to the item, " Rent of offices, $125." If that was the Wellington office, then the worst place possible had been chosen. This office was situated up a side street, in a dingy building ; whereas the opposition office-that of Cook's Tourist Agency-was on Customhouse Quay, and in the front part of the Government Insur- ance Building. If the department was to be of any service to the colony there must be more enterprise shown, and unless that were the case the question of its abolition would have to be considered next year. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) would like some in- formation on the item, " Grain grading on be- half of the Imperial Government, #4,000." It seemed a large sum to spend on the salaries of graders, and he hoped the Minister would give them some information about it. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) asked who was the trade representative for whom pro- vision was made for £450-was it Mr. Gow, or Mr. Cameron ? Mr. HERRIES asked where Mr. Cameron's salary came in. Sir J. G. WARD said, Under the Agent- General's Department. Mr. HERRIKS said he also wanted informa- tion about the item, " Advertising South Afri- can steam-service, $250," and also the item, "Advertising for Secretary, £72." That seemed to be a large amount to spend in advertising for a Secretary. Sir J. G. WARD (Colonial Secretary) said the honourable member for Christchurch City was right in stating that until recently the depart- ment had not been very active. Now, however, the department was being organized, and there was reason to hope that in the future there would be no legitimate grounds for complaint in that respect. The object of the department was not for the purpose of being used for com- petitive purposes whatever. Its object was to assist the colony generally by bettering existing markets and obtaining fresh markets for the benefit of all classes in the country. It was not to be used as a trading or a competitive depart- ment. Regarding the premises to which the honourable member had referred, it was neces- sary that this office should be on a ground floor, and when the department first commenced they looked round to find a suitable office tem- porarily. Some time ago the Government took steps, under the Public Works Act, to acquire the land at the rear of the Post Office, known as the Levin Block. In the building there to be erected provision was to be made for the ac- commodation of the Industries and Commerce and Tourists Departments. The accommodation in the office occupied by Cook's Tourist Agency in the Government Insurance Building was not by any means adequate for the Tourist Depart- ment. Regarding the item $4,000 for grading, that expense was incurred entirely on behalf of the Imperial Government. The system was to charge so much per bag for grading, and that charge was sent forward to the Imperial Govern- ment. The Imperial Government had cabled out in every instance asking that the New Zealand Government graders should grade the cargo on their behalf ; the charge to be made on the bag rate. There was no loss to the colony in this respect. An Hon. MEMBER .- Is there any profit ? Sir J. G. WARD said there was no profit attached to it. The charge made was 2d. for With regard to the item, ten 80 1b. sacks. " Advertising for Secretary," he might say that it was not originally contemplated to appoint Mr. Donne Secretary of Industries and Commerce. It was only after the receipt of the applications that it occurred to him that it would be better to have a combined officer, and that Mr. Donne could take both offices, and the expenditure for advertising was incurred as he had explained. An Hon. MEMBER asked if the position was advertised throughout Australia. Sir J. G. WARD said it was advertised throughout New Zealand. There was a scale for Government advertisements, and that was 
<page:712>
cations for a steam-service to South Africa, the advertisements appearing, he thought, in the Australian as well as in the New Zealand papers; but, as none of the offers were con- sidered satisfactory, they could not recommend any of them to the House for acceptance. The difficulty in connection with this matter was that there was no return cargo from South Africa. If there were, it would be unnecessary to offer anything in the shape of subsidies to steamers to go there at all. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) said it appeared from the estimates that the amount expended in connection with this department last year was only £304. If that was the total amount expended, it seemed to him that the department had been very tardy- Sir J. G. WARD .- The department was really not created then. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL said, When a depart- ment on almost identically the same lines was set up in 1895, after it had issued one or two circulars the department dropped out of exist- ence. Now, he thought the importance of such a department to the producers of the colony could not be overestimated ; but, so far as this present department was concerned, compara- tively nothing had been done. No doubt the appointment of Mr. Gow as travelling repre- sentative was a suitable one, but it was only a few weeks ago that he had left our shores. It seemed to him that he should have imme- diately been despatched from New Zealand with samples and information, so that the commodities of the colony could have been brought under the notice of the people of South Africa and of the other countries it was intended to reach. Almost any big in- dustrial association could in a few hours have supplied the Government with all the samples required. Victoria, in 1894 or 1895, despatched a number of Commissioners to tour Africa and the East, and the information they gained had had the effect of so increasing and improving their export trade in butter and other produce that New Zealand was left completely in the rear. With regard to the appointment of Mr. Donne, he was not sure that it was a desirable one, as head of the Commerce and Industries Department. He did not think a better man could have been obtained for the management of the Tourist Branch, but, as his experience had been chiefly gained as a Government rail- way officer, he could hardly be said to be the best man obtainable for the establishment of trade, industry, and commerce. The Govern- ment ought to have been able to get a first- class commercial man who had been personally identified with the industries of New Zealand. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) said. As to the remark of the honourable member for Riccarton, that Victoria had left New Zealand hopelessly behind in regard to the export of dairy produce, he might say he had seen a report from Weddel and Co. in last night's Post that Australia had been left behind in this respect, and that the quality of the New Zealand butter had been improving year by year. Sir J. G. Ward referring to the quality. Mr. BUDDO said he thought more informa- tion should be available to the settlers with regard to the London market. Now, if a sys- tem of regular telegrams, say, once a week,. could be published, that our settlers could have confidence in, as to the markets for grain, frozen meat, and dairy produce, such informa- tion would be of great assistance to them. The large order of 20,000 tons which had been mentioned, there was not the slightest doubt, had misled the settlers, for, in his opinion, it had been executed before it was announced ; so that the information had been of no value at all. Then, some days since news came from London that an order had been placed in Mel- bourne for 5,000 tons of oats. He had no doubt in this case the order had already been filled. These announcements acted to the detriment of farmers, who held their oats, buoyed up with the belief that there was a large order to be filled, and then subsequently were compelled to sell at a considerable loss. This had happened last year. Oats were worth 1s. 6d. a bushel - no very extraordinary price. Then, the news came of the very large order to be filled, and oats were held back for some months and were then sold for 1s. 3d., put in store by specu- lators, and within two months they were worth 2s. per bushel. If the Agent-General would send telegrams giving the average price for grain, frozen meat, and butter, and any other information in regard to European markets, it would give confidence and be of real service. Another question he would like answered was, When was the department going to advertise in the Gazette the weight of cornsacks to be carried on the New Zealand railways next grain season ? Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) suggested that the Minister should lay on the table of the House and circulate through the colony a copy of the instructions given to the Trade Representative, so that everybody would know what was in- tended. He would also like to know how much grain had been purchased on behalf of the Imperial Government. He thought the House ought to know what purchases had been made by the New Zealand Government on behalf of the Imperial Government, and the price which had been paid by the Imperial Government. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) would like to have the amount stated that had been bought by the Spanish Government, or the Barcelona mer- chants, at the instigation of the Imperial autho- rities. He very much questioned whether, in the matter of a trade representative, the Govern- ment had selected the best man. It seemed to him that they selected people not because of special ability, but as a reward for some political service to the party in power. Some years since he had referred to Mr. Holmes, whose appoint- ment he then considered would prove a waste of money. The result, he thought, justified his statement. The Minister was a gentleman with a knowledge of commerce, and must know that the merchants in this colony were intimately ac- quainted with the conditions of markets and 
<page:713>
prices all over the world. The information that | Dunkirk, Liverpool, and Hull. He wished to Mr. Gow would be able to impart they already had impress upon the House the necessity of doing at hand. He approved of the suggestions made everything it could to widen the markets of the colony. Then, here were one or two other sets by the honourable member for Riccarton. The of figures : Victoria did business with nineteen Government could easily appoint gentlemen who would give information week by week as to the foreign ports, New South Wales with seven- teen, and we with nine. The department now prices ruling in the various principal markets of under discussion had been practically dead since the world. As to the frozen-meat trade to the it was started ; but he hoped, as they were voting Cape, there was the fact that cool-storage would a large sum towards it, that during the next be required there in order to secure any mea- twelve months it would do something to justify sure of success in delivery, and the question its existence, otherwise he, for one, would be was, Would that pay? He did not think it willing to abolish it. He thought the depart- would. But they might depend upon it that there were gentlemen connected with the grain ment should devote its energies not so much to the development of the tourist traffic, in which and meat trade who were intimately acquainted he did not think there was very much after with all the opportunities in almost every mar- all, but to the widening of our markets, and ket in the world, and it was only flinging away if they did so they would deserve well of the money to send a man of very average ability to look after this matter, perhaps because he had country. been doing a little successful political touting. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) said this ques- answer to the honourable gentleman's figures tion was a serious one, and there were facts and figures connected with it of so striking a cha- racter as to command the serious attention of every member. About eight or nine months with these other ports which accounted for the ago a conference of the Chambers of Commerce amount of trade done by the Australian Colonies of New Zealand had been held in Christchurch, referred to. It would be more to the point if at which a number of very important matters had been discussed, and the following resolution, ideas to the Minister. If the Government among others, was brought before that body by could afford to attract those steamers to this Mr. Patterson, of Dunedin, and carried unani- country that were always trading to Australia, mously : "That, in the opinion of this confer- we should, of course, be able to do a greatly increased trade with the countries alluded to. ence of the New Zealand Chambers of Com- Efforts had been frequently made in various merce, (1) the wide extension of New Zealand ports on the Continent of Europe and in the trade is a matter of national importance and ought to engage the serious attention of the Go- Old Country to get sufficient cargoes to fill even sailing-vessels to come here regularly, but there vernment and of the commercial community."  The motion also urged that the Government was not sufficient cargo to do so. If this colony should grant steam subsidies, commended the were to open up a trade with Germany it might Department of Industries and Commerce, and be possible to attract other steamers here, but what cargo should we have to fill the expressed a hope that the extension of trade would be made by it a leading object. In this vessel in return? We had not the goods that Germany would take in, because the rates connection he would put two or three sets of of their tariff against what we had to send figures before the Committee which he consi- dered worthy of its serious consideration. New would preclude us from sending cargoes. If the Minister in charge could succeed in Zealand exported of her products to the United bringing vessels from Australia to New Zealand Kingdom 79 per cent., to Australia 14 per cent., -such vessels as were trading there-there and to foreign countries 6 per cent. New South Wales exported to the United Kingdom 31 per might be some opportunity for a return trade. Coming to the question of London alone, he had cent., to other British possessions and foreign to say that what the honourable gentleman had countries 35 per cent., and to the Australian stated was true : that if a depression occurred Colonies 34 per cent. ; while Victoria exported in London this country suffered. But, if a de- to the United Kingdom 30 per cent., to other pression occurred in London, it was London British possessions and foreign countries, 42 per that controlled the trade of the world ; and if cent., and to the colonies of Australasia 28 per London was depressed, that depression would cent. This showed that New Zealand was be felt throughout the other countries trading relying almost altogether on London for a with it and us, unless, of course, there might market, and was consequently affected by the be special circumstances, such as those prevail- slightest depression or expansion of that market. ing in South Africa at the present time. As to They were making no effort to widen their the department itself, he wished to say he did field of commerce. A Committee had been set not think sufficient salaries were being given to up by this House to deal with trade and com- attract the most capable men to take control merce. Last year it had met once, elected a of the departments. Competent men would Chairman, and done no more business. This not take control of affairs under $1,000 per year it had never met at all. There were ports annum. One company in Christchurch paid its to which the Australian Colonies had steamship manager £1,000 a year - he was a capable man lines constantly running, and which we never -and it paid them to do so. Men who were sent a ship to. He would name some of these : really fit for positions in these departments Manila, China, Japan, Bremen, Hamburg, VOL. CXVIII .- 45. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) said the was that this colony should have all the same fleets of steamers as the other colonies, which was impossible. It was the steam connection the honourable gentleman would offer some 
<page:714>
department, he recognised, was on its trial, and, for himself, he intended to watch it very carefully for the next year or two, and if results were not satisfactory it would be for the Govern- ment to consider what should be done to put matters on a better footing. A sum of £3,000 was asked for on the estimates for the extension of markets. Now, how was this money to be properly expended ? Whose was to be the guiding mind in the countries to which repre- sentatives of the colony were sent to advance its interests? The Government representative in London was of opinion that the Government should open shops in different parts of Great Britain, so that New Zealand meat might be brought under the notice of the people at Home. Theoretically that was a good idea, but, for himself, he did not think there was much in it. He was inclined to think that the competition of trade would discover what were the most lucrative markets for our meat, and if the sum asked for was spent in establishing shops in different parts of Great Britain, the returns, he thought, would not be commensurate with the expenditure. The Commissioner, to his mind, required to be instructed on a number of matters appertaining to the department in which he was called upon to work. Of course, it was neces- sary that he should be given an idea of the price at which our different products could be turned out, so that on going into the markets of the world he could there furnish all necessary infor- mation regarding the exports of the colony. The Government were perhaps somewhat late in sending a Commissioner to South Africa. At any rate, if the £3,000 asked for was properly ex-  pended under capable guidance he was sure it would bring good to the colony ; but unless the brains were there for the proper guidance the whole amount might be frittered away use- lessly. Sir J. G. WARD (Minister of Industries and Commerce) said, regarding the question put by the honourable member for Riccarton, as to the desirability of having a commercial man at the head of the department, he would suggest to the honourable gentleman that if he had been in the position of the Government he would have done well to do just what the Govern- ment have done. In establishing a commer- cial department in the colony the House could not be asked for an unusually large sum of money until the project had, at any rate, had a trial. The Government decided to establish a Tourist Department, and to place Mr. Donne at the head of it also. The honourable member, he thought, would recognise that if the depart- ments were divided it would mean the esta- blishment in the colony of two sets of offices and of two independent clerical staffs, and he (Mr. Ward) believed that Mr. Donne, with his suitable training and with the assistance of commercially trained men, would prove him- self thoroughly worthy of the position of head of the combined departments. He did not see the necessity of having two independent heads, one at the head of the Tourist Department and the other at the head of the Commercial De- Mr. T. Mackenzie Mr. Donne, and an opportunity of showing his capabilities should be given him, and next year he thought he was safe in saying the House would admit that the step had been fully justi- fied by events. The honourable member also said that undue speed had not been exercised. It was all very well to criticize him, and very easy to pull down, but the honourable mem- ber must himself admit that it was some- thing more difficult to build up. It was quite true the department was proposed by him some years back. He shortly afterwards went out of office, and it was never in active operation until a few months ago; and, no matter what department was started, it would take some time to get into trim. Instead of judging of the future by what had been done in the past, it would be only right, he thought, that the department should be judged from the present time onward ; and if next year the position was not a satisfactory one, the honourable gentleman could then round the Government up in the orthodox way. In reply to the honourable member for Kaiapoi, he wished to say the Government were now esta- blishing in connection with the department, in the colony and also in London, a commercial intelligence department; and, as soon as that department was in working order, the fullest information would be given to the public. either by cable or otherwise, and any informa- tion received from the department at Home would be published regularly in the colony. A commercial intelligence department of the kind would be of invaluable service to the colony as a whole. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) asked if the department would differentiate between the price of Wellington mutton and that of North Island mutton. Sir J. G. WARD said he did not think that would be fair, because there was a great deal of North Island mutton that went from Welling- ton, and if they attempted to differentiate, as suggested by the honourable member, it would be misleading to the people. In the same way there were thousands of carcases railed to Christ- church from Southland and sent Home as Can- terbury mutton. For the information of those concerned, he wished to say that he hoped to be able next week to announce the weight that the Government had decided upon in the matter of grain - sacks. While strong repre- sentations had been made to fix the maximum weight at 1001b., he might say he intended to gazette it at not exceeding 200 1b. Of course. those who chose to bag their grain in 80 lb. bags, or any other weight, would be welcome to do so. but the gazetted weight would be 200 1b. He would lay on the table of the House the instruc- tions that had been given to the Trade Repre- sentative. For the information of honourabir members he might say that the instructions to the representative, broadly, were these : Before going away from the colony 4.0. Mr. Gow was instructed to go to all the more important towns in New Zealand to make himself known to the mercantile and 
<page:715>
producing world, and to get from them samples to take away to other countries, and there to put them on view free of expense to the people here. He had taken away a large and repre- sentative quantity of samples of all classes of produce from this colony. After his arrival in South Africa he was to report as to the advisability of establishing State freezing-works there for the benefit of the colony as a whole. He was sorry that the honourable member for Waitemata had a somewhat poor opinion of the Trade Commissioner. Mr. Gow was an ex- perienced man, and, among other things, was a strong man ; and he could say a strong, forcible, brainy man, such as Mr. Gow was, was the sort of man to send from this colony on a mission of that kind. He was sorry he could not give the honourable gentleman any information about the quantity of grain sent to Spain. It had been sent by private firms, and not through the Government. In reply to the honourable member for Bruce, as to the quantity of grain sent to South Africa, he might say that in different shipments the Gevernment sent in all, up to date, about 27,000 tons, which represented two orders from the Imperial Government. The first order was for 5,000 tons, which was immediately increased by another 5,000. The shipments exceeded the 10,000 by nearly 2,000 tons, and that quantity of 12,000 tons was shipped in June of last year from the Bluff Harbour by three steamers. The shippers were the National Mortgage; New Zealand Loan and Mercantile; Wright Stephenson ; Tothill, Watson, and Co .; Henderson and Batger; and Nicholl Brothers. He would be glad to lay a return, which was now prepared, on the table  of the House. The price was 24s. per quarter of 3201b., including insurance and freight, de- livered in South Africa. The other order for 15,000 tons was received in March, and was shipped by the steamers " Croham," " Knight of St. George," and " Vienna." The whole of the shipments were made from Lyttelton, Timaru, and Oamaru, the shippers being Messrs. Fried- lander and Co., and G. G. Stead, and the price 24s. per quarter of 3201b., delivered in South Africa, including insurance and freight. Those were the only two orders shipped by the New Zea- land Government, and were made on behalf and under instructions of the Imperial Govern- ment. There had been a number of orders re- ceived in the colony completely outside the Government. English and Australian firms had been competing for the trade in South Africa; but in every case where orders had come from the Imperial authorities they had been accompanied by a request that the New Zealand Government graders should grade the shipment and certify that the quantity and quality were all right. With the exception of one complaint from South Africa that some bags by one shipment were not sufficiently well sewn, no complaints had been received. Honourable members would recognise at once that in cases such as this the Government could not give away the Imperial Government's information when they cabled out for ship- ments. It had to be remembered that quite recently it came under the notice of the Govern- ment that both Canada and Russia were com- peting very hard for this South African business, and every member of the House would agree that it was the duty of the New Zealand Go- vernment to try and keep these orders for the colony if they could. He knew, himself, that some leading firms in Victoria, if they could have kept the price down low enough, would have controlled the business with the War Office, and, had they succeeded, they would have forced down the prices to the farmers of the colony. On the whole, he thought New Zealand had had its fair proportion of the orders from the Imperial authorities. He might say that the Imperial Government had recently placed with this Government three further orders for 5,000 tons each, and in this we had acted entirely on the instructions of the War Office. The Government had not interfered with the traders at all, and had sim- ply stepped in in order to keep the trade to the colony if they possibly could do so. The orders received in the colony through the Government were, he believed, infinitesimal compared with those received by independent firms outside the Government altogether. The Government were quite prepared to receive suggestions from the business community on this or any other sub- ject, and they wished to give to every one the benefit of the Commerce Department as far as possible ; but he repeated that the Government could not, nor would they attempt to act the part of traders. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) said the Minister seemed to have missed the point of his question in connection with the publication of the prices of frozen mutton. What he desired was that the intelligence department at Home should do justice to a large number of the farming community in the colony by publishing the whole of the prices. The cable messages re- ceived in the colony gave the prices of South Island, Canterbury, and North Island mutton, but one never saw the price of the Wellington article, and that materially affected the farmers of the Wellington Province. At an annual meeting of the Wellington Meat Export Com- pany the chairman of directors pointed out that so well had the company graded their meat that on the London market their mutton brought only d. less than prime Canterbury It was never more than }d. less. mutton. Now, North Island mutton generally was some- times as much as 1d. less than Canterbury, and the farmers in the country districts were misled by the price for North Island meat being I quoted to them. When these North Island prices were quoted to the farmers they materi- ally affected the prices these farmers accepted for their sheep. Sir J. G. WARD said he would ask his col- league the Minister for Agriculture to endeavour to have the Wellington prices cabled from London. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) said, Ac- cording to the Pastoralists' Review, one of the most reliable journals published, Wellington meat did not occupy the position claimed for 
<page:716>
Now, the difficulty in connection with this commercial intelligence department in Lon- don would be that the trade would not give to the representative there what the prices really were ; and unless a man was actually in the trade, buying and selling, he had not got his finger on the pulse of commerce. New Zea- land should do what Victoria and several other colonies had done : they should establish a trade office in the busiest part of London. Victoria had samples of all her produce at a trade centre in Leadenhall Street, so that the commercial world could see what Victoria was able to do at any moment. It would be of no use to New Zealand if the commercial people had to go to the west end of the city for information, as it was entirely out of the range of com- merce. As to the Tourist Department, he did not think a better man could have been obtained to take charge of it than Mr. Donne. He was a keen sportsman, and took great interest in its natural and native interests. In conclusion, he would like to ask the Minister if the Trade Commissioner would be required to report re- garding the necessity for cool-storage in Lon- don as well as in South Africa. Sir J. G. WARD said the Commissioner's instructions were to report upon the possibility of the opening -up of markets wherever he went; and this applied to Great Britain. Re- garding the proposal to establish cool-stores in England, involving great issues, that was, of course, a very big question, and it would take him an hour to deal with the matter fully. Upon this matter the Trade Representative was instructed to confer with the Agent-  General in London, who had already gone into this matter. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) understood the Minister to say that the maximum weight o corn-sacks to be carried on the railways was 200 lb. Did that mean the railways would refuse to carry sacks over 200 1b. ? Sir J. G. WARD said, No ; but the heavier sacks would be penalised in the ordinary way. Mr. MASSEY said, In the grain-growing districts of the colony each grower tried to make the sacks of a uniform weight, and he did it by quarter-bushels. Now, if the maxi- mum weight were fixed at 200 1b., that was 3 bushels and 20 1b., which was somewhat awkward for calculating. If it were fixed at 210 1b., that would be 3+ bushels, and would be much more convenient for all concerned. Sir J. G. WARD said the trouble was that the sacks of over 200 1b. in weight frequently burst, both in loading and discharging ; and, besides that, they were rather heavy for the average man to handle. However, he would be glad to confer with the honourable member with a view of arriving at a more convenient weight for calculation. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) said that, al- though they had been told that this depart- ment was not yet in working-order, and so ought not to be criticized, they had here a Superintendent at $500 and five clerks at $1,000. He thought this was a little too much. Jir. T. Mackenzie of this colony was known in every market of the world, and if the business-men in other parts of the world wanted our produce they would ask for quotations ; but the trouble was that our merchants would only give f.o.b. quo- tations, and this did not suit the buyers. Furthermore, they did not pack their goods in a manner suitable to those markets they were desirous of collaring, and unless they were prepared to meet these requirements it was useless to look for new markets. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) thought that a good deal of money was wasted because there was no system pursued in connection with advertising, and a return recently laid before the House showed that a great deal of economy could be effected without impairing efficiency. They had a real live department in the Depart- ment of Industries and Commerce and in the Tourist Department, and he thought one of the functions of this department should be to con- trol the Government advertising. This matter could then be dealt with on a businesslike basis. He believed a great deal of good work had been done by the Tourist Department, and more especially in connection with the Royal visit. He thought the Government were to be congratulated on attacking this question of tourist traffic in a businesslike way, and trusted the officers of the department would be allowed to continue the good work they had commenced. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) said that when in England he had frequently attended the Agent-General's Office, and there seemed to him to be one important element lacking in connection with the sale of the colony's pro- ducts, and that was any proper advertising of the products the colony had for sale. He used to wonder why nothing was heard of New Zealand products in England. Every paper that came from New Zealand had a column or a column and a half as to what the experts were doing in the Agent-General's Office re- specting New Zealand produce, but nothing of this appeared in the English papers. He would willingly see £1,000 put on the estimates for the purpose of advertising the colony's products in the English newspapers, and he believed it would be the best expenditure of money the colony could make. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) ex- pressed the opinion that the premises occupied by the department were very unsuitable. They were old and badly situated, and no amount of patching up could make them adequate for the purpose. It seemed to him absurd that offices of the Tourist Department should be stuck away in a back street. It was reasonable to suppose that this was only a temporary arrange- ment, but he would like some indication from the Minister as to what the intention of the Government was as to providing a permanent building. Sir J. G. WARD said he had already ex- plained that this was only a temporary office. and that as soon as the building was erected behind the Post Office, the land for which was 
<page:717>
now in course of being acquired, permanent offices would be provided there. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) said, In regard to the execution of Imperial orders for oats for South Africa, there was a feeling of gratitude amongst the farming community at these orders having been placed in New Zealand, but at the same time there was a strong feeling that there was some mystery about their execution, as not a line of information had appeared as to who executed the orders, what was paid, or port of shipment, et cetera. Sir J. G. WARD said that he had just given full particulars to the House during the honour- able gentleman's absence from the chamber. Mr. MEREDITH hoped the Government would give some guarantee that a different method would be adopted in future, and that information would be given. He knew of cases where farmers had sold their oats for 13d. a bushel, whereas if they had such information as would have enabled them to hold them they might have received 2s. As it was, the differ- ence between these two amounts had gone into the pockets of the middlemen, instead of into the pockets of the producers. Sir J. G. WARD said he had given the whole of the details in connection with this matter to the House and could not be expected to go over them again; but he could tell the honourable gentleman only two Imperial orders had been so far executed by the Government. The course followed in those two cases by the Government was the only one that could be. followed in the future. If the Government gave the whole information put into their  hands by the Imperial Government they would have done a very improper thing, and it might have resulted in the loss of the orders. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) said the farmers alluded to by the member for Ashley, who sold . their oats at 11}d., had nothing to prevent them holding them, and it was ridiculous to blame the Government for their mistake. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) asked if the two orders referred to by the Minister were included in the two sums placed in B .- 6, and in Gazette No. 48. Sir J. G. WARD said the returns included the whole of the orders executed by the Govern- ment up to date. Vote, £8,908, agreed to. Tourist and Health Resorts Department, £16,147. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said he had been informed that the printing for the Tourist Department, which was of an expensive kind, was given out to private offices. If that was so, he was disposed to say that it was a waste of money, because the Lands and Survey Depart- ment was well able to undertake it. Sir J. G. WARD said no printing had been given out at all. Mr. FISHER did not doubt the honourable gentleman's word, but the impression had got abroad among well-informed persons that the printing of the Tourist Department had been given out to private offices. Sir J. G. WARD said the honourable gentle- man might be referring to a postcard which had been given out, and which was to be resold by the Tourist Department. It was given out be- cause they could not get it done otherwise. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) said that in the Tourist vote he did not see any vote for Rotorua as far as the new baths were con cerned. Sir J. G. WARD said it would appear on the public works estimates. Mr. HERRIES said there was a subsidy of £100 for maintenance at Te Aroha, and he trusted there would also be a vote on the public works estimates for works now being carried on there. Sir J. G. WARD said he was making pro- vision for Te Aroha as well. Mr. HERRIES hoped the Minister would do so. The £100 subsidy was quite insufficient for the works at present in hand. Then, there was only the small subsidy of $50 voted for the doctor at Te Aroha. That was not enough to induce a doctor to reside in the place. The doctor at Rotorua was to get a considerable advance in salary, but it would have been better if the increase had been given to the doctor at Te Aroha. Sir J. G. WARD said the doctor at Te Aroha also received fees, but the other officer was not allowed to practise at all. Mr. HERRIES said, That might be so, but there was a great difference between £600 and £50, and the latter salary he thought might, at any rate, have been brought up to the salary given to the doctor at Hanmer-namely, £125. Sir J. G. WARD said that, although it was proposed on the estimates to give an increase of £100 to the doctor at Rotorua, it had not yet been finally decided by Cabinet. Mr. HERRIES would like to inform the honourable gentleman that several doctors had gone to Te Aroha at a salary of £50, but it was quite insufficient, and they had all left. It was very necessary that there should be a doctor at the place, and he hoped the Minister would con- sider the question of raising the subsidy. At present there was no doctor there. Sir J. G. WARD said he would make in- quiries into the matter. He knew nothing of it himself, but if $50 was not sufficient to induce a doctor to stay there probably other arrange- ments could be made. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce) said that since last session he had visited Rotorua. An increase of £100, he noticed, was to be given to the medical officer at Rotorua. Well, some time ago a vote was passed for the services of a Balnealogist at Rotorua-an officer who would be competent to tell people the value of the different baths and their effect on particular diseases. He believed the colony could make these baths a very great attraction indeed if they would only secure the services of a man who was able to analyse the whole of the waters of the district. Rotorua, he might say, was as nothing compared with other parts of the district. Waiotapu, for in- stance, would wipe out Rotorua easily, and when he was there last year he was given to understand that steps were then being taken to 
<page:718>
analyse the waters of that district. He would like to know if the Minister had been informed of the result of the analysis. The Minister might also tell the House whether the idea of appointing a Balnealogist had been aban- doned. Sir J. G. WARD said the idea had not been abandoned. Mr. J. ALLEN was glad to hear it. A first- class man should be appointed-one who knew the whole subject thoroughly. He believed it would pay the colony to get such a man, even if they paid him £1,200 or £1,500 a year, and he did not think they would get a capable man for less. There were immense possibilities in the district. He would also like to know what the expenditure of $600 at Tokaanu was for. He understood there were baths there, and he hoped the expenditure was justified; but he understood that the baths were used en- tirely by Maoris. Under the heading " Other charges " a sum of money was put down for accommodation-houses. He would like to know if these were private enterprises, and, if so, why public money should be spent on them. He also wished to know the reason for esta- blishing branch offices at Auckland, Christ- church, Dunedin, and Invercargill. Then, with regard to the subsidy for a steamer on the Wanganui River, was that subsidy for the one line of steamers-Mr. Hatrick's-or for both ? Sir J. G. WARD agreed with the honourable member that they ought to get a first-class man from outside to take charge of the thermal districts of the colony. The Government attempted to get one, but the remuneration  that they offered was looked upon as inade- quate. They offered £1,000, but it did not fetch the right man. They could only give what they thought was a fair amount. They would do what they could this recess, and next session, if in the same position, would ask the House what to do. Regarding the places of accom- modation mentioned by the honourable mem- ber, he might say that one was on County Council land, and had Government stables in connection. With regard to the others, he could not give detailed information, for the reason that this department had only just been taken over by the Tourist Department from the Lands Department. During the recess he proposed to send a responsible officer to visit these places, and see what could be done in the matter of arranging some general system in connection with that department. As to the branch offices in the four centres, they were absolutely necessary, for many people came to the colony who wanted information about the scenery, railways, and places to visit, and at present this information was only to be obtained from private firms, and the idea was to have these offices in the various parts of the colony to give information fully and freely to all who desired it. Regarding the subsidy to the Wanganui River steamers, he might briefly state that the position was this : Under the original contract the conditions were such that the con- tract had to be renewed The proprietors of the Settlers' Company suggested that fresh Mr. J. Allen tenders should be called for. That the Go- vernment could not do without acting dis- honourably. When the present contract ex- pired the same position would not again arise. As there appeared to be very strong competition between the two concerned, it was decided to give a similar subsidy to the other line of steamers to assist the new company in maintaining what they believed to be an essen- tial service. The item on the estimates in- cluded the subsidy to both companies, and, with the development going on in that river, he did not think it was an undue amount to give for the maintenance of both lines. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) wanted to know why there was an item of credit under the Pub- lic Revenues Act for Rotorua when there was no such thing on account of Hanmer Plains. There must be a certain amount of money taken at Hanmer, but yet there was no credit in their favour. Sir J. G. WARD said the doctor at Rotorua collected £400 or $500 in fees, and they were paid into the Public Account, so that his salary cost the colony very little indeed. Mr. FLATMAN asked if the medical officer was allowed to practise privately at Rotorua. Sir J. G. WARD said, No. Mr. FLATMAN called attention to the fact that he had been unable to procure a return passage for an impecunious visitor to Rotorua Springs. He thought that in such cases the passage should be paid from the baths as well as to them. He did not know why they should send people from the South to Rotorua, as he believed the waters at Hanmer were as bene- ficial in some cases as the waters at Rotorua. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) said, When the Hon. W. P. Reeves was in charge of the department two beds were established at Rotorua for friendly societies, but this had been found quite inadequate for the accommodation of even a few members of the societies who might be in need of treatment at the springs. He knew that some concessions were already granted in the way of cheapening the rates in regard to board and lodging, and in the remis- sion of bath-rates, where poverty was pleaded ; but he thought some little concession should be given to those in receipt of small incomes, such as small farmers, workmen, or old-age pensioners, so that they might be able to visit the springs at, say, a charge of $1 per week with railway charges remitted. This would enable many a poor sufferer to enjoy the benefit of our mineral hot springs, and perhaps effect a cure of such diseases as rheumatics, sciatica, nerve troubles, et cetera. He hoped the Minis- ter would be able to tell the House that further concessions in this direction were intended. Mr. PALMER (Ohinemuri) said the proposi- tion of the last speaker would mean a consider- able increase in expenditure, and he believed the House would readily vote for a larger sum to enable those poor people who were suffering to receive treatment at the baths at the colony's expense. With regard to the Te Aroha Springs, there were a number of the bath-houses there going to rack and ruin, and people were actually 
<page:719>
bathing in houses that were dangerous. He | the Government provided free beds. The vote noticed on the estimates only £50 as subsidy for a doctor, and £100 as a subsidy to the Do- main Board. He hoped when the supplemen- tary estimates came down a sufficient sum would be provided to put the houses he had mentioned in proper repair. He had already many times brought the matter under the notice of the Minister. Sir J. G. WARD said the requirements of Te Aroha would not be overlooked. The Govern- ment were going to equip the sanatoria at the various places as fully as possible. In reply to the member for Geraldine: Hanmer Springs received in maintenance fees £1,139 19s. 10d. As to the question of free patients, there were patients now being treated at Hanmer free of charge, and the number of beds for the friendly societies had been increased from two to four. In a matter of this sort the Government would necessarily have to exercise a good deal of care, otherwise the friends of those people requiring treatment might do nothing in the way of assistance, but would look to the Government to give them everything free. It would be for the hospital and charitable aid institutions to do their part also, and make recommenda- tions as to who should be accommodated at these sanatoria. When it was realised that Italy obtained twenty millions sterling from its tourist traffic, this colony must look upon the tourist traffic as an important branch of its administration, which should be developed in every way possible with the funds at his disposal. Mr. BOLLARD (Eden) was pleased to learn that the Government was going to do more for  Te Aroha. Compared with what had been done for other places this health resort had been absolutely neglected. He hoped that for this place a substantial sum would be put on the supplementary estimates. Mr. WILFORD (Wellington Suburbs) said the Minister professed that a great number of people had been helped by the vote described as " Assistance to invalids," but he noticed that the amount voted last year had only been $40, and the amount expended reached the insig- nificant sum of $4, so that not much could have been done in this direction. If the expen- diture was continued at the same ratio next year they might expect about €6 to be spent. This surely did not bear out the desire of the department to assist those in need of assist- ance. There were many bona fide cases which the Government had not seen its way to assist. He wished, however, to take the opportunity of congratulating the Government on the appointment of Mr. Donne, and to place on record his feeling with regard to that appoint- He believed Mr. Donne's unfailing ment. courtesy and general knowledge was of much benefit to the colony. He would, however, like to know why there was not a larger vote to help those people who could not help them- selves. Sir J. G. WARD had already explained that the Hospital and Charitable Aid Boards were required to pay for the passage of people where was only used where it was absolutely necessary for expenses in necessitous cases, which neither the Charitable Aid Board nor any one else would defray. There were also numbers of people who were given free passages ; but they were not going to lay it down as a system that they would carry people free and give them free beds. It could not be done. The only way was to ask that the charitable aid body should be responsible, if these people had not friends who would pay for them the very low rate of carriage by rail as well. Mr. GUINNESS (Grey) thought if there was any department which warranted an increase of expenditure it was this department in regard to providing additional free beds for the class of persons who would be benefited by a course of treatment at the curative springs at Rotorua. The Minister knew that the districts repro- sented by the Premier and by himself and other West Coast members, in consequence of the very wet climate, contained a large number of people who required treatment at these springs for rheumatism and other complaints. He would urge upon the Government the de- sirability of seeing whether they could not in- crease the vote for these free beds, and increase the number. He quite agreed that every proper precaution should be taken, but believed that by doubling the number of beds available for ordinary members of the public, apart from those granted to friendly societies, they would be conferring a benefit upon the country and upon humanity. There were many persons who were suffering acutely, and whose suffer ings could be relieved by treatment at these springs, and therefore increased accommoda- tion should be provided. There was not suffi- cient information given as to the form of the application which had to be made and the con- ditions upon which persons would be received and treated. It would be a proper thing for the Government to issue some notification as to the conditions under which people were re- ceived - for instance, the conditions under which members of friendly societies, and per- sons who had no means whatever of paying for their keep, were received and treated at the Rotorua Sanatorium. Mr. LANG (Waikato) drew attention to the fact that there were very fine hot springs in his electorate at Waingaro, which was only three hours by rail from Auckland and about one hour's drive by coach over a most picturesque road. The Tourist Department should do some- thing to improve the state of this road. There were also hot springs at Kawhia. Then, there were the celebrated Waitomo Caves, which were at present very difficult to reach. He hoped something would be done to make these spots more accessible to travellers. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said it was quite patent to the most casual observer that a first-class Balnealogist was wanted. From all available evidence the gentleman in charge at Rotorua was not the man for the position of Balnealogist, not being thoroughly expert in the matter of these baths. They had 
<page:720>
to the appointment of an expert to analyse the waters and advise the department in order to recommend the use of certain baths. Until this was done the hot springs would not pro- perly fulfil their mission. It was proposed, he noticed, to increase the doctor's salary by $100 ; he was only giving the opinions of those who had been at Rotorua, but he thought any one with a knowledge of this officer would hesi- tate to vote for an increase in his salary. The duties he performed were not very onerous, nor, according to all accounts, was his ability of a very high order. If the Government were sin- cere in their desire to make the best of our natural health resorts, why did they not adver- tise throughout Europe and secure an expert ? Mr. PIRANI .- They have done that. Mr. HUTCHESON said, Yes ; but they did not make an appointment. If any honourable member moved to reduce this officer's salary by £100, he did not know that he would be able to carry out his original promise to main- tain it on the estimates. Mr. COLVIN (Buller) wished to draw the attention of the Minister to the fact that he had presented a petition last session from the West Coast in regard to the Maruia Hot Springs. He wished to know whether the Minister would inquire into the matter . Sir J. G. WARD said, regarding the Waitomo caves it was a place he intended to have in- quiries made concerning, with a view to seeing whether an accommodation-house could be pro- vided at a place called Hangatiki. He could add nothing to the remarks he had already made  concerning the medical officer at Rotorua ; he had heard nothing against that officer. As he had already stated, he would endeavour through the Agent-General to see whether a #cc-zero suitable Balnealogist could be got at a reason- able salary ; he was not prepared to pay an ex- cessive salary. They had already offered £1,000 without success. He might point out that the medical officer at Rotorua earned from £400 to £500 a year in fees, which was paid into the Public Account. He would be glad to have inquiries made into the representations made by the honourable member for the Buller, and gave an assurance that an officer would be sent to inspect and report. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) said he wanted some little information about the item, "Hanmer Sanatorium - Maintenance of houses and grounds, and amusements, £800." Last year the amount under this head was £1,550. He would like to know how much of this went for amusements, and what these amusements con- sisted of. He did not object particularly to amusements, but he thought they should be distributed all round. On behalf of 7.30. the member for Bruce he wished to remind the Minister of a question asked by that honourable gentleman with regard to a subsidy of $800 for a steamer on the Wanganui River. What the member for Bruce wanted to know was, whether that amount included pay- ment for the carriage of mails, or whether there Mr. Hutcheson purpose. Sir J. G. WARD said he thought the sum included the payment for the carriage of the mails. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) said the member for Kaiapoi had spoken about the necessity of the Government providing beds at Hanmer Plains for those in poor circumstances who desired to stay there for a time for the benefit of their health. Hanmer Plains Sanatorium was in the Ashley electorate, and he wished to say the Government had already done a great deal in that direction. The accommodation at the Sanatorium, too, was excellent, and the charge was moderate-only £1 per week; and any person who was not in a position to pay for the baths could have the free use of them on apply- ing to the caretaker, who had discretionary power. The total expense was therefore re- duced to £1 per week. There were even a few free beds for people who were so impecunious that they could not afford to pay £1 a week. He would like to point out to honourable members that the total receipts from the baths last year amounted to £473 18s. 6d., being £33 18s. 6d. in excess of the expenditure. The receipts from the sanatorium amounted to £1,226 6s. 10d., while the expenditure was £1,139 15s. 5d. In other words, the revenue exceeded the ex- penditure by £110 11s. 9d. He had no doubt there were properties in the waters of Rotorua that were not similar to those in the springs at Hanmer Plains; but, as the member for Geraldine had already spoken of the value of the baths at Hanmer Plains, it was not neces- sary to say anything more on that point. During last year 2,014 persons visited the springs, and the number of baths taken was 17,964. Hanmer Plains was undoubtedly in- creasing in its attractiveness. The persons who took advantage of the springs came not only from New Zealand, but from Australia, America, India, and England. He would also like to point out that the accommodation was altogether inadequate for the number of persons who were annually attracted to Hanmer Plains, and he was glad to see that this year a vote had been put on the estimates for the purpose of increasing the accommodation. The increase in the doctor's salary was not large, but he thought the time was not far distant when it would be necessary to have a medical officer set apart for the patients, as at Rotorua. The doctor visited Hanmer Plains weekly. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) asked, For what reason had the salary of the medical officer at Rotorua been increased. The Minis- ter had said that the medical officer at Rotorua had paid into the Public Account $500 that he had received in fees from private practice. That seemed a large amount, and he would like to have a return showing the total amount and the account into which it was paid. With regard to the doctor there being allowed to take private practice, it was worth the consideration of the Minister whether it was not stifling private practice at Rotorua. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) wished to call 
<page:721>
attention to the fact that there were in- | it. He agreed that something should be done creases provided on the estimates for the doctor, the matron, and attendants at Rotorua, whereas there were no increases provided for the manager and caretaker at Hanmer. See. ing the great increase of visitors at Hanmer of late, and the difficulty there was in procuring accommodation during the summer months, he thought the Minister might make inquiries as to whether the circumstances did not warrant increases being given to the officials of Hanmer the same as at Rotorua. Mr. RHODES (Ellesmere) asked whether it was the intention of the department to replace the vote for the guide at Mount Cook Hermitage, which this year had disappeared from the esti- mates. A guide was necessary for all except expert mountaineers who wished to make ex- peditions in the locality. He would also like to know whether the Hermitage had proved profitable to the Government. He did not be- lieve that Mount Cook would ever become a popular resort until the journey could be made from Fairlie Creek to Mount Cook in one day. Sir J. G. WARD said, in reply to the honour- able member for Geraldine, that the circum- stances of Rotorua and Hanmer had to be taken into consideration. There was a great deal in what the honourable member said, and as soon as he had had that branch of the depart- ment a sufficient time he would deal personally with these matters. It was not intended to dis- continue the services of the guide at Mount Cook, and provision was being made for his continu- ance. He could not at the moment state what the profit or loss was on the Hermitage, but he might say that Mount Cook was looked upon as a spot of great interest to the country, and the Government would do all in their power to make it as get-at-able as possible. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) did not   think the Government had ever done justice to our mineral waters, nor had they hitherto secured a sufficiently high quality of man to take charge of these valuable springs. The Government had pursued a penurious policy, and had limited the Agent-General to too small a sum to attract any one from the spas of Europe, whither the Agent-General went in search of a man to come out to New Zea- land. He was glad the honourable gentle- man was now in charge of this department, for attract tourist traffic, and he was in full sym- he was sure he would instil into it some business enterprise and acumen, and would not grudge the price that would have to be paid to get a first-class man to come and bring these waters into notice. He believed that so far no proper analysis of these waters had been made, and unless that were provided the people of baths, double the charge was made to visitors Britain would not take notice of them. Even when samples of water were sent down to Wellington for analysis certain chemical changes took place in transit, and there had never been a fair test of the properties of those waters. He believed the honourable gentleman had pro- mised to authorise a sum of $1,000 to secure the services of a first-class man. Sir J. G. WARD .- Yes. Mr. T. MACKENZIE was very glad to hear I sale price against a retail one. in the way of providing specially cheap fares, both by rail and steamer, for the benefit of those people who were absolutely without money, and who required treatment for skin diseases and rheumatism. In connection with the tourist traffic, he thought some money should be expended upon the introduction of game into the country, and more money should be spent on opening up tracks between the east and west coasts, so that greater facilities might be extended to those people who wished to traverse the country. Mr. SYMES (Egmont) said the great draw- back to the tourist traffic at the present time was the want of accommodation. From Wa- nganui, via Wanganui River, to Tokaanu there was not a single licensed house to put up at, simply because the people could not get a license ; and unless a tourist resort could be licensed they could not expect people to visit those places. He noticed that in some out- of - the - way places subsidies were granted to doctors, but in the back blocks of his district they had been unable to get a subsidy for a doctor. He trusted the Government would make provision on the supplementary esti- mates for subsidising a doctor, at any rate, at Wangamomona, where the settlers were quite willing to subscribe $1 for $1 for any subsidy that might be granted to enable the settlers to get a permanent resident doctor. Mr. McGUIRE (Hawera) thought 8.0. sufficient was not done to advertise the country. If properly advertised much good could be done, for we had scenery which was equal to that of Italy and Switzerland com- bined : a mountain, the most picturesque in the world - Mount Egmont: the burning mountain Tongariro; the New Zealand Rhine -the Wanganui River-and other attractions. It would be no small advantage to the country for tourists to see the beautiful land round Taranaki. As the New Zealand summer was the winter at Home, this was an additional ad- vantage. If the advantages of the country were made known it would prove most attractive, and there would be tourists in all parts of this country, who would leave golden streams behind them. He would advise the Minister in charge of the estimates to do everything he could to pathy with what was being done at the present time, though he did not think enough was done to make known in the Old Country the good points of this beautiful land. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) said his attention had been called to the fact that, at the Rotorua that was made to residents for the use of the baths. He thought the charge should be the same, and failed to see any reason for a reduc- tion to residents. Sir J. G. WARD said the reason for the dif- ferentiation was that residents bathed all the year round, while visitors bathed only for a few weeks or months. It was a case of a whole. 
<page:722>
Mr. PIRANI replied that it was the casual visitors who used the baths wholesale, and he thought there could be a system of season tickets. Sir J. G. WARD said that there was a system of season tickets. Mr. HASELDEN (Patea) asked whether the subsidy to the steamers on the Wanganui River was in connection with the tourist traffic, or for mail purposes. Sir J. G. WARD .- For all purposes. Mr. HASELDEN asked if both steamers were treated in the same way. Sir J. G. WARD said that both steamers were to be treated equally from a date some time back - from the time the arrangement was made. Mr. FLATMAN (Geraldine) wished to refer \- to the differentiating charges at the Hanmer Springs. People who stayed at the Sanatorium were allowed the free use of the swimming- baths, while other visitors had to pay for the use. He thought that was not right, and asked the Minister to take note of his objection. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) had been given to understand that the second-class accommo- dation was very limited, and that it was fre- quently taken possession of by people who went there on a pleasure-trip, while those suffering from ailments had to seek accommodation else- where, and sometimes to drive two or three miles to the springs. People suffering had to get accommodation some distance off, and he thought something should be done to provide for a certain amount of accommodation being reserved for invalids.  Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) said, in regard to Rotorua, the Minister for Railways might provide a car for those suffering from rheumatism. Vote, £16,147, agreed to. Miscellaneous services, £81,398. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) moved, That the item, "Copies of Review of Reviews for Australasia for January, 1901, £260," be struck out. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) said he noticed in a journal the Rev. Mr. Berry had made the statement that he had arranged with the New Zealand Government to deliver twelve lectures. He would like to know what remuneration he was receiving for that service. Sir J. G. WARD said he understood he got $100. Mr. MONK said the Premier had previously informed him, in reply to a question, that no arrangement had been made with Mr. Berry. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) asked for an ex- planation of the item referred to by the honour- able member for Wellington City (Mr. Hutche- son). Sir J. G. WARD said ten thousand copies had been obtained ; five thousand were sent to the Agent-General for distribution at Home, and five thousand were distributed through America, India, and the Australasian Colonies. Mr. PIRANI thought it was going too far to spend £260 to circulate copies of this produc- tion. If the House had been consulted as to circulating ten thousand copies of this publica- tion broadcast he felt sure it would not have con- sented. The point he wished to make was this: he did not think an expenditure of this sort ought to be made by the Government without the authority of Parliament, and that Parliament should be afterwards asked to whitewash those who authorised the expenditure. That was putting Parliament in a wrong position. If the Government wanted to spend money in circu- lating literature of this kind, they could get more useful literature to advertise the colony than ten thousand copies of a production like this issue of the Review of Reviews. If the Premier wished to advertise himself and his personal appearance, why did he not pay for the cost out of his own pocket ? Why should the ratepayers have to pay £260 for circulating a periodical of the kind, considering the small benefit that must attach to the colony from it ? Mr. SEDDON (Premier) thought it was only fair to the Government that, before members condemned their action, they should have the fullest information on the matter. When that explanation was given he was sure that mem- bers would not complain of the course the Government had taken. The matter was in- troduced in this way : The Queensland Govern- ment arranged for an article, and certain illus trations were to be inserted in the Recicle of Reviews of their colony, at a cost, for ten thou- sand copies, of something like 6d. a copy, and, in a communication the New Zealand Govern- ment received from the proprietor of the maga- zine, it was intimated that the Rev. Mr. Berry was to write an article on New Zealand on lines similar to what had been written on Queens land. The Government, taking into considera- tion the nature of the article on Queensland, came to the conclusion that, at the cost to the colony, it was an opportunity that should be embraced. The Government did not inspire the article. The writer, it was well known, was a very able man, a man with a thorough knowledge of the colony and its affairs, and, gauging the article by what had appeared about Queensland, it was concluded that a similar article on New Zealand would be worth all the Government were asked to pay for it. For himself, he was still of the same opinion. The Review of Reviews reached people that no other ordinary periodical reached. It was an opportunity of bringing the colony forward, and he could only say now that the Govern- ment did not apologize in the slightest for what they had done. The colony had received good value through what the Government had done ; and, after the sanctioning of the article, the only question was whether the Government should hide the amount in " Unauthorised," as they could have done, or whether it should be brought before the House openly. Of course, to bring it before the House was the proper and constitutional way, and that was the way the Government had adopted. The transaction was a purely business one, and no member, he thought, could reasonably take ex- ception to it. He had heard several times that the Australasian Review of Reviews was an 
<page:723>
offshoot of the Review of Reviews published were being cut down to almost vanishing-point at Home by Mr. Stead. He (Mr. Seddon) it was unfair to ask honourable members to support expenditure of this kind. It was a understood there was no business connection most unfortunate admission that the Premier between the two periodicals, and that they had made, that he did not know what form the were distinct proprietaries. Hon. MEMBERS .- Oh ! Mr. SEDDON said he had seen it stated by the proprietor of the Australasian Review of Reviews that, beyond getting permission to use the same title, the Australasian edition had nothing now to do with the Home publication. Mr. PIRANI .- He did not say it. Mr. SEDDON said that was his recollection of what the proprietor of the Review of Reviews said. At any rate, he could say this : that the Australasian edition was not connected with the Home periodical. He also desired to say that the Rev. Mr. Berry was not a paid official of the colony. He had heard that statement made, but there was no foundation for it. Mr. W. FRASER (Wakatipu) said the Pre- mier had remarked that it was due to the Government that an explanation should be given of this matter. He (Mr. Fraser) con- sidered it was still more due to the House that that explanation should be made. The Premier took credit for the fact that he had in a straight- forward manner asked for a vote on the esti- mates which he could have hidden up in " Un- authorised." Had he put it under " Unautho- rised " it certainly would not have appeared on the estimates, but it would have appeared in the particulars of " Unauthorised," which had sooner or later to be presented to the House. The question whether the Review of Reviews was a pro-Boer paper or not had nothing what-  ever to do with the matter in dispute. He agreed that it was a good thing to advertise the colony ; but advertisements in the form of an article such as this could not do much good.   The Premier said he did not inspire the article, but he must have known pretty well what Mr. Berry's political proclivities were. He thought there ought to be some limit to the Government rushing into expenditure of this kind without the authority of the House. He would vote against the item, simply to record his protest against such a waste of money. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) intended to vote for the amendment. As far as he could recollect, the article was eulogistic of the colony, and particularly so of the legislation of the last few years and of the Right Hon. the Premier him- self. He did not expect anything else, but he objected to the taxpayers having to pay for it. The Premier said he did not know what the article was to contain; but the plates must have been sent over by the Government, be- cause similar plates appeared in the work that was under notice last night. Mr. SEDDON said, That was so. Mr. MASSEY said that, instead of being worth £260 as an advertisement, the article was not worth 260 pence. It was not nearly so able an article as the one that appeared in the previous January number from the pen of the Hon. Mr. Twomey, or one that had recently appeared, writ- ten by Mr. Bruce, the late member for Rangiti- kei. At a time when the public works estimates article was going to take, and it was a most unbusiness-like arrangement on the part of the Government. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said they were in a difficulty about the amendment, be- cause if the money had already been paid there was little use voting against it. Mr. SEDDON said he believed it had been paid. Mr. FISHER said that what he objected to in this matter was that the money had been paid to a traitor of the Empire. Dr. Fitchett was not a traitor, but Mr. Stead was, and the money went to the business firm of Stead (Limited). The Boers had voted £50,000 of their secret-service money for the purchase of English newspapers, and it was beyond doubt that Mr. Stead had received his share of that money, and now this colony was giving him $260 more. Mr. SEDDON .- It has nothing to do with Mr. Stead. Mr. FISHER asked if Mr. Stead was not the owner, or part owner, of the magazine. Mr. MASSEY said that the Premier had stated he made the arrangement with Mr. Stead. Mr. SEDDON had said nothing of the kind. He had no communication whatever from or with Mr. Stead. Mr. Stead had no connection with the Australasian Review of Reviews what- ever. Mr. Fitchett had stated that Mr. Stead was not the editor of the Australasian Review of Reviews, and it was absolutely distinct from that published in England. Mr. FISHER said that the two editions of the magazine were run separately, but their business interests were the same. As to the article on New Zealand which appeared in the January number of the magazine, there was nothing in it that was original and had not appeared before in our own publications. If this article was so valuable as was represented by the passing of this vote, what became of the statement that the Agent-General was so able an exponent of everything that affected the interests of New Zealand? If it were not for the fact that this money had been paid he would vote against it as strongly as he had spoken against it. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) said that months ago he was given to understand, and he still believed, that Mr. Stead was not the owner of this paper. When the Government were asked to insert the article that appeared in the Australasian Review of Reviews in the Review of Reviews at Home the Government did not see their way to do so. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) held in his hand a copy of the issue of the paper for which the House was asked to vote $260. On one of the pages appeared the words, " Review of Reviews for Australasia : English editor, W. T. Stead ; Australasian editor, W. H. Fit- chett." 
<page:724>
thing beyond what the world knew, namely, that Mr. Stead was the editor of the English Review of Reviews. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL asked what more the honourable gentleman wanted than that this man Stead was the English editor of the Australasian paper Review of Reviews. He would also find page by page and letter by letter the reprints from the English issue of that magazine, and to say that Stead was not interested in this magazine was childish on the part of the Premier. When the Boer war started they were obliged to form themselves into a company for the purpose of trying to disassociate themselves from the ignominy and contempt attaching to the name of W. T. Stead for his connection with the pro-Boer party at Home. With regard to the Rev. Mr. Berry, who wrote this article, he had been away from the country for some eleven or twelve years, and the consequence was that he had had to obtain everything for his article from books or information sent to him. There were hundreds of men who could have written a better article than Mr. Berry. The Govern- ment had not been wise in incurring this lia- bility to pay the concern £260, when they might, by looking at the entry before the contract was entered into, have seen the name of Stead, and have said, as hundreds upon hundreds of other clients had done, that while that man was con- nected with this periodical they would have nothing to do with it. One of the leading news- vendors in the City of Christchurch had told him that, owing to Stead's connection with the Review of Reviews, its circulation had gone down  almost to nothing. He thought he had shown clearly that, at the time of this publication, Mr. W. T. Stead was clearly the English editor of the Australasian edition of the Review of Reviews. Mr. SEDDON said the honourable member had proved what he (Mr. Seddon) had asserted- that a new proprietorship had been formed, and that the journal would be conducted as originally, with the Rev. Mr. Fitchett as editor. What the honourable member had done had been to exactly prove his (Mr. Seddon's) con- tention -- namely, that Mr. Stead had at some time something to do with the Australasian Review of Reviews. He might have been con- nected with it at starting as a shareholder, but things were now changed. An Hon. MEMBER .- He is one still. Mr. SEDDON said the honourable member made that assertion without any proof. It was like many statements that were made in the House by honourable members, it had no foundation. There was no proof whatever that Mr. Stead owned a single share in this property. The public statement of the Rev. Mr. Fitchett was to the effect that the Australasian Review of Reviews and the English Review of Reviews were under two proprietaries. That statement had been published. The Rev. Mr. Fitchett was a truthful man, and he accepted his word when he said that an alteration had taken place. He could only say that, from the date he referred cern, distinct and apart altogether from the Home Review of Reviews. That fact had been publicly notified ; and it was also known positively that a company was formed, and he took it that at that time whatever interest there had been in the property in the Mother- country was taken away by the Australian pro- prietary, and that it was now an Australian- owned journal, edited by one of ourselves-the Rev. Mr. Fitchett. He could say that he had noted the writings of this Review of Rer ews. and there had been nothing in it of the cha- racter that had been denounced by the honour- able member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher) and by the honourable member for Riccarton. He challenged them to show anything in it upon this question which would not uphold what had been done by the Parliament and approved by the people of New Zealand. It may have been that there was cause for the separation ; that the Rev. Mr. Fitchett and the Australian proprietors would not have anything to do with the Home Review of Reviews so long as certain views were advocated in it respecting the South African war; that the partners bad disagreed, and that consequently there had been a dissolution and a new proprietary formed : but why, in that case, should they blame the new proprietors and denounce them when they had gone on new lines that were in accord with what the members in this House had them- selves approved? That surely was not reason- able. The debate upon the question had come as a surprise upon him ; he had not heard a single word from any member previously on this subject, nor had he seen a single comment of this character in any newspaper in the colony. He could only take this as an example of what they would do in order to found an argument with which to attack the Government. That this was so could readily be seen. Who had raised the question, and who had taken it up ? Who found fault with this expenditure? Was it not those who had carped at everything ? Had not he criticized everything very freely and very adversely this session ? But to de- nounce him (Mr. Seddon) as disloyal because he was a member of the Government that had agreed to give this advertisement to the Review of Reviews was most extraordinary. That was the impeachment, and when that was so it was to be seen that honourable members were very easily disposed to impeach him. An Hon. MEMBER .- No. Mr. SEDDON said the Government was im- peached because it had given an advertisement to a paper that was at one time partially owned by a gentleman who, it was said, was a pro. Boer ; and, being so, was a traitor. Surely on such an occasion there was no necessity for heat or strong words. The Review of Reviews was well written and widely circulated, and. 10 far as the Australian edition of it was con- cerned, the charges that had been made by the member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisheri, aud by the member for Waihemo, Mr. T. Macken- zie, did not lie against the editor Mr. Fitchett. or the proprietary. They surely ought not to 
<page:725>
take extreme views and denounce people in a ment which was used to demarcate the boun- daries of their own country. The spectacle of way which would cause others to say that they were not fair-minded, using terms that he re- a huge portion of the African or Asiatic map gretted to see employed. It must be being painted red, green, or blue, as the case 9.0. admitted that Mr. W. T. Stead had might be, exercised a soothing effect upon their done great service to the weak and oppressed, nervous vanity, and operated as a kind of ex- hilarating dream upon their national pride." and was a very able man. All he could say was that the Government had done their best, as It that ? they thought, in the colony's interests. would be a fair thing to say that the Govern- able gentleman's point of view, but it proved ment had exceeded their powers in this ex- that the Premier's statement was incorrect. penditure, and to attack them on that ground ; The Premier stated that there had been a but the Parliament gave the Government change of policy in regard to the Review of $150,000 a year at the discretion of the Minis- Reviews, but the honourable gentleman was not try, without a vote, and if the Government candid enough to say that that change occurred brought this item before the House rather than after the January publication. He (Mr. Pirani) charge it to " Unauthorised " they were entitled had two issues in his hand, one with the name to credit rather than blame. Mr. T. MACKENZIE (Waihemo) said he was of Mr. W. T. Stead appearing as the English editor and the other without his name. not concerned at all about the amount of £260 ; what he was concerned about was that they should in any way countenance a paper that to was made in November. had Stead's name associated with it. It was all very well to say that this edition had nothing was wrong; the notification was published in February, and its terms were quite different to do with Stead, but that was merely a cun- ning move on Stead's part to maintain his from those quoted by the Premier. There, circulation in the colonies, for the people of however, was the fact : the January number had the Premier's article, and in it there were Australasia would have had nothing to do with articles by Mr. Stead, while in the number that a paper with his obnoxious name connected with it. He believed Stead, however, to be appeared two months later Mr. Stead's name did not appear at all. Then, the article which still the largest shareholder in it. If not, then he sold his interest at a very big price. Per- was written on Queensland was a well-written article, and in it there was not a single picture sonally, he had never had a copy in his house of a politician. In the number that contained since Stead had turned traitor. the article on New Zealand, however, there were Mr. SEDDON .- Why not go to another ex. five pictures of Mr. Seddon in different attitudes treme, and move to strike it off the library list ? Mr. T. MACKENZIE said, If he had the -vignette and full length-and in different cos- running of the library like the Premier he tumes -- summer dress, winter dress, and others. No wonder, indeed, that the Premier said the would do so. It was natural for members to feel indignant that the money of the country Rev. Mr. Berry was a talented writer ; but he should be paid to any magazine connected with was far more talented in the selection of the subject of his illustrations. the name of a man like Stead. The thing would have been quite complete if Grattan might be, what he wished to say was that Grey had been hired to write the article. It there was great objection to money being had been proved that Labouchere had received spent in this way. It was all very well for the Premier to speak about such an article being Boer money to betray the interests of Great Britain. What was the result of the action of an advertisement for the colony, but, as & pro-Boers like Stead and Labouchere? It en- matter of fact, if there was a useless way to couraged the Boers to continue the fight, and advertise the colony it was in such a way as this. No publication in the world would insert resulted in the loss of valuable lives. Mr. PIRANI ( Palmerston) said the Premier as an interesting article for its readers one that had challenged any member to produce an was full of advertisements of one prominent man. On the face of it the article bore the article of a pro-Boer tendency from this edition impress of an advertisement. The article on of the Review of Reviews. In the very copy at Queensland, on the other hand, was not an ad- present under discussion there were two such articles -one, written by Mr. W. T. Stead, vertisement for any prominent politician, but reviewing the past century, which was stronger an advertisement for the colony itself. in its statements than anything in any other to Parliament that members should speak in number, and another written by a lady in praise the way the member for Wellington City (Mr. of the Boers. Fisher) and the member for Riccarton had done Mr. SEDDON .- No. Mr. PIRANI said he would read an extract in of Mr. Stead. proof of what he said :- made a great impression on the people of Great " The victims of the hallucination that Britain and the civilised world. He was a man England should dominate Africa imagined that who had defended the weak against people who were living and gloating on the depravity of in some mysterious way they became happier, and their Empire became stronger, if they were the poor ; yet the member for Waihemo and allowed to take a paint-brush and colour the others spoke about him in a way that led one to think they would rend him in pieces if they map of other continents with the same pig- Mr. BARCLAY .- What is the matter with ! \--- Mr. PIRANI said, Nothing from the honour- \- - Mr. SEDDON said the notification he alluded Mr. PIRANI said the honourable gentleman However that Mr. HOGG (Masterton) said it was no credit Mr. Stead was a man who had 
<page:726>
hood be influenced by his religious creed or conscientious convictions ? No matter what his opinions about the war might be, he was a celebrity in the world of literature, alike dis- tinguished for his intrepidity and ability. Why, then, resort to persecution? More intolerant sentiments than those expressed by the member for Wellington City (Mr. Fisher) and the mem- ber for Riccarton he had never listened to in his life. It had been said that the Rev. Mr. Berry knew nothing about New Zealand, as it was twelve or fourteen years since he left the colony. As a matter of fact, it was only a few years since the reverend gentleman occupied a church in Wellington, and he no doubt knew just as much about the colony as the member for Riccarton himself. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said he did not care anything for the $260, or for the alleged advertisement that the article was going to give the colony in England. He understood that the Premier challenged any honourable member to produce any articles which appeared in the Review of Reviews written by Mr. Stead in favour of the Boers. Mr. SEDDON .- I said that the Australasian Review of Reviews was not pro-Boer. Mr. FISHER said he supposed, then, that if he said he had read articles in the Review of Reviews in favour of the Boers he was wrong. If that was what the Premier meant, why was it necessary for the Rev. Mr. Fitchett to disown the views of Mr. Stead in the Australasian Re- view of Reviews, and say that no more of Mr. Stead's articles should appear in the Review of Reviews? The people of Australasia, to em-  ploy figurative language, had risen in revolt against the Review of Reviews, and it became necessary to disown Mr. Stead in order to save the circulation of the Review of Reviews. Sir J. G. WARD said the honourable mem- ber had made a statement that the Government had purchased ten thousand copies of the Re- view of Reviews, which was edited by Mr. Stead. Were members going to be stuffed with non- sense of that kind, when Mr. Stead lived twelve thousand miles from Melbourne, where this paper was published ? Because Mr. Stead's name appeared on one page of this paper the member for Riccarton said he was the editor of it. Numbers of the most highly respected men in New Zealand were advertising in the Austral- asian Review of Reviews, knowing that Mr. Stead was disassociated from it altogether. It had been said that because Mr. Stead's name appeared in this paper he was the editor of it. Probably Mr. Fitchett's name appeared in the English edition ; and could it then be said that Mr. Fitchett was the editor of the English Re- view of Reviews. There was the fact that Mr. Fitchett had given publicity to a statement that Mr. Stead had nothing to do with the Australasian Review of Reviews. An Hon. MEMBER .- Where is that state- ment ? Sir J. G. WARD would be happy to get a copy and show it to the honourable gentleman. Why, some of the leading newspapers in Auck- Mr. Hoag paper, and why did not honourable members attack the proprietors of those papers? The whole thing was a storm in a teacup. Simply because the Government believed it to be de- sirable to keep the name of the colony in the forefront by advertising in this Australasian paper, that was converted into a controversy pro-Boer versus British loyalty. It was su- premely ridiculous. They had been applied to to give the same advertisement to the English Review of Reviews, and had declined to give it. Could there be a stronger proof of their bona fides than the fact that, after giving it to the Australian Review of Reviews, they had refused it to the English one ? There were hundreds of people who had refused to take the English Review of Reviews, as he him- self had done, because of its pro-Boer advocacy, but he had never seen a single article in the Australian Review of Reviews to which, on that ground, exception could be taken. An Hon. MEMBER .- Dozens of them. Sir J. G. WARD said there were articles that had been copied from other journals ; but similar articles had been published in New Zea- land journals, and they surely could not stig- matize a journal as disloyal because it quoted opinions with which it did not sympathize. As he had said, he had never seen a single original article which was pro-Boer in the columns of the Australasian Review of Reviews, or which was not in support of the British Empire. Mr. FOWLDS (Auckland City) said it was not often that a discussion changed a vote he intended to give, but that was the case with him to-night. The discussion had decided him to vote against the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Wellington City. He had himself lived in South Africa, and had forgotten a great deal more about the Boer question than some of the gentlemen who had been howling jingoism that evening had ever known. He did not agree one little bit with the ideas on the Boer question that had been expressed by Mr. Stead, but at the same time there had been that evening the greatest mani- festation of un-British sentiment and feelings that he had ever witnessed. It was supposed to be a British idea to give fair-play. but there had been statements made during the discussion about Mr. Stead that no one could prove, and that had not, he believed, a single word of truth in them. There were men in Great Britain who stood head and shoulders above the gentle- men who had spoken that night who held similar views to Mr. Stead on the question of the Boer war, and they were men who had given greater attention to the subject than the gentlemen who had spoken, and were not traitors. He did not agree with those who were with Mr. Stead in this matter, because he had himself seen the conditions existing in South Africa, and believed it was impossible for the two races to live side by side without having settled once and for all which was the dominant power ; but when he heard honourable gentle- men making speeches over a paltry #260 being paid to a paper, and the editor of that paper 
<page:727>
say it was un-English. What would be said if the same position were taken up in respect to other questions and other newspapers ? It would be pointed to as the most absurd narrow- mindedness ; but here they had these broad. minded men lecturing the House about putting an advertisement in a paper because some one who had been connected with it had expressed pro-Boer sentiments. What would be thought if the Government, in the matter of adver- tising, say, a railway excursion, refused to put the announcement in an Opposition paper ? He had intended to vote against the item as an indication that he disapproved of expenditure by the Government in this direction, because he did not think it was a right thing for the Government to come down to advertising in this way; but now, as a protest against the utterances made that evening, he should vote for the item. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) said he had intended to vote to strike out this £260, because he considered it an unnecessary expenditure of public money ; but, after having heard the explanation of the Government, and also having heard the speeches delivered by honourable members, in which they had deliberately ac- cused the Government of propping up anti- British institutions and supporting men of pro-Boer sentiments, and in that way diverting discussion into an altogether wrong channel. using this advertisement as a weapon of politi- cal warfare of a most unjust and unfair kind, he had determined to vote against the motion proposed by the senior member for Wellington City. A business man who was a Conservative,  and who on that ground declined to advertise in a journal because it expressed radical senti- ments, would be looked upon as a madman. The Government had advertised in a widely- circulated journal, and to condemn them in the way that had been done was neither rhyme nor reason. He had also listened to the charges made against Mr. W. T. Stead. Now, he knew that during a large part of his career Mr. Stead had been fighting the cause of the poor and oppressed, that he had stood by the most helpless part of humanity when it had not been his personal interest to do so, and that he had done this not only to the ruin of his own reputation and to his financial loss, but that for it he had been degraded and imprisoned. This gentleman had taken up an attitude in connec- tion with the war in South Africa which every patriotic man must deplore. Surely they were honourable enough to give him credit for honesty of purpose; though mistaken, he be- lieved him to be honest, and he did not believe he had accepted a penny of Boer bribe. He believed him to be sincere, and that what he was doing was from a mistaken sense of duty. He did not think the Government ought, for the future, to go in for this sort of advertising ; and the Government should learn from the present debate that their strongest supporters would not support them if they did. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) said he could not understand the attitude of the last intended to vote against the item on principle. How could the attitude of honourable gentle. men criticizing the item on side issues affect the principle ? He took the same attitude as the Premier, who said it was unfair to attack the item because of the character of the paper re- ferred to. He wished to draw attention to this point : his mind went back to a time more than twelve months ago when the writings of an officer of the House were under consideration, and the attacks levelled at him when defending that officer, though not sympathizing with his writings. It was idle to pretend there was no association between the two editions of this paper, when on the title-page the joint editors' names were noted. He was amused at the strange defence that had been made of Stead from those whose Imperialism and anti-Boerism was known throughout the colony. However, all this did not affect his attitude in regard to this vote. No Ministry had a right to embark in a line of advertisement of this kind without consulting the House. Nor did he think the advertisement was worth the money, as it was well known that the journal did not command anything like the respect it did. Moreover, the colony did not want advertising in this way. Mr. SEDDON said, It was fair argument to discuss the question on the lines adopted by the last speaker, but he would point out that session after session they had incurred liabilities in respect to advertisements of the resources, industries, and scenery of the colony, which they thought would be advantageous. All other colonies and all other countries in the world were doing the same thing. If, however, the House was of opinion that they should not do it, let them try conclusions and in a proper manner indicate that to the Government. What did the member for Wellington 10.0. City say ? He said, "I care nothing for the £260." Well, he (Mr. Seddon) under- stood the House was discussing whether the estimates should be passed, but as the member said, "I do not care for the money ; it is because you advertise in a paper, and because that paper has certain views on a certain question that I attack you ": then it meant that the Government must advertise only in certain papers. If the Government advertised only in papers that supported them, it would mean that a large number of papers would not re- ceive Government advertisements at all; and if that argument was to hold good some honourable member would call for a return to show to what papers the money for Government advertising had gone. An Hon. MEMBER said the return was on the table at the present time. Mr. SEDDON said, Yes, they could take that return, and what did they find ? They would find that the Government had been absolutely fair in distributing its advertisements, and had not withheld them from the papers that differed from them. There were thousands of pounds involved in that return, yet here was a long discussion raised about a paltry #260; therefore, he came to the conclusion that some 
<page:728>
tunity, and, through it, attempt to injure the Government. He held he was right in coming to that conclusion. It was known that any patriotic cry was a popular one to take up with the masses in the country, and an endeavour was now being made to show the country that the Government were assisting parties who held opposition views. He had no doubt an attempt had been made that night to injure the Govern- ment : it was shown in speeches in which refer- ence was made to the connection of the Go- vernment with the publication in question. Well, he would repeat that, months before this article appeared, the Australasian Review of Reviews renounced the connection with the English Review of Reviews. He was himself acquainted with Mr. Fitchett, of the Austral- asian periodical, and he knew that that gentle- man was not one who would descend to sub- terfuge. At all events, when the matter came to the Government it was decided to adver- tise. They had on a previous occasion decided to advertise in London in the British Austral- asian. The House voted the money for that purpose. The House, the Government took it, appreciated what was done in that respect. Then, in the last edition of the British Austral- asian Western Australia had an article simply for the purpose of bringing before the people of the Mother-country the advantages of that colony. Queensland had advertised itself, or, at any rate, had brought itself before the world in the same way. He did not think it was right to speak about it as a matter of "advertising' -to apply that term was inappropriate and mis- leading; but the colony had brought before the  world its resources, its industries, and its capa- bilities in a manner that seemed to the New Zealand Government to warrant them in fol- lowing the example. The article was sanc- tioned in good faith. The responsibility as far as the plates were concerned must rest with the Government, although he (Mr. Seddon) had not made the selection. He never threw responsibility on others ; as the head of the Government he was responsible, because, of course, the editor of the periodical had to select from what the Government submitted to him. As for the Rev. Mr. Berry, he believed that gentleman had a thorough knowledge of the affairs of New Zealand. He was a capable and conscientious writer ; he had kept himself in touch with New Zealand, and it was thought that an article from his pen would be in the interests of the colony, circulated as it would be through this medium. From begin- ning to end no fault could be found with the article on its merits. In the debate no fault had been found with it on its merits. And why should the integrity of the Government be im- pugned ? Why should it be said they were aid- ing and abetting disloyalty ? Reference had been made to the case of Mr. Grattan Grey. Now, he said Mr. Grattan Grey was never at- tacked by a single member of the House for his writings. What happened was this, and it was well known to honourable gentlemen : that a certain resolution had been passed by the Re- Mr. Seddon that no Hansard reporter should write on political subjects or identify himself with con- troversial matters; that that resolution had been communicated to Mr. Grey and to all the officers of the House by Mr. Speaker; and when Mr. Grey, in defiance of that order, per- sisted in disobeying it, and practically would neither express regret nor promise he would not do it in future, it simply remained for the House to affirm that over its servant it had control. That was the position the House took up, and the world ought to know it. They never did and, he hoped, never would in this country interfere either with the liberty of speech or the liberty of pen. At the same time order must prevail, and no parliamentary officer could be allowed to defy Mr. Speaker and the Parliament. Mr. LANG (Waikato) said, With reference to this particular vote of $260 for the Review of Reviews, he believed it was unquestionably wrong to use the taxpayers' money in this direc- tion, because it was not used for advertising the colony so much as for advertising the Premier and his supporters. Another reason why money should not have been spent in this direction was that there were many just claims which could not be settled because it was said there were not sufficient funds for the purpose. In the case of many petitions in which Committees of the House had recommended payment of certain sums, the Government could not be got to settle them. There were also numerous cases in which roads were urgently needed in order to give settlers access to markets, and yet for want Then, the of funds these wants were not met. Premier spoke as if the Government adver- tisements were equally divided between the papers which supported the Government and those which were opposed to them. But this was not the case. There were two papers in his own electorate called the Waikato Argus and the Waikato Times. The Argus was not always a strong supporter of the Government, and in consequence of that had got the large sum of £7 18s. 5d. for Government advertisements, whereas the Times, which was always a strong Government paper, and which he believed was either owned or partly owned by a late Minis- ter of the Crown, who was now in the Upper House, received the sum of £61 18s. 10d. in that way. The two papers were filed in the library, and honourable members could see them and judge for themselves. As for the circulation, it was generally admitted in the electorate that that of the Waikato Argus was by far the largest. The position the Premier had taken up in trying to stamp out that paper had done it more good than anything else that could happen, because the settlers of the Waikato, above everything, liked fair-play, and it was only natural that they should sup- port a paper which the Government were trying to stamp out. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) said that anything more extraordinary than that the Australasian Review of Reviews had pro-Boer tendencies he had never heard in that House. 
<page:729>
The editor was the Rev. Mr. Fitchett, the dis- tinguished author of stimulating literature of the " Fights for the Flag " and " Deeds that Won the Empire" kind. There was not a more loyal or patriotic man in the whole of the Australasian Colonies. He understood long ago that the connection between the Australasian and the English publications had been severed ; and, from all he had seen of it since, he had not seen anything in it of a pro-Boer nature or character. To follow out the arguments that had been adduced to their logical conclusion, we must taboo such repu- table English publications as the Nineteenth Century, The Contemporary, and the West- min.ter Review, which contained articles of what would be called a pro-Boer nature. It had been even said that he himself was a pro-Boer. He was not a pro-Boer, but an anti-Jingo. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said he had never dreamt of accusing the Premier of subsidising a pro-Boer paper. He had moved to strike out the item because in the article they had a lot of absolutely useless photographs, quite irrelevant to the subject-matter, that would be misleading to people outside the colony. If it had been a well written dis- passionate article, giving authentic informa tion, and not party political views, it would have been a different matter. If there was any justification at all for this unauthorised ex- penditure of £260, surely it would be that it would recoup the colony by making her attrac- tions better known to people of the Old Country. He objected to this article, thron upon the rubbish heap. as a means of getting New Zea-  land better advertised. The article was not in accordance with fact; it showed party bias, and was calculated to mislead. If he had 11.0. had an opportunity he would have   voted against that other self-laudatory work which the Premier had imposed on the tax- pavers of the colony. Mr. ELL (Christchurch City) said the item was not justified, and was unwarranted, and that would be his reason for voting against it. He did not himself believe that the Premier would have advertised in a paper if its editor had been suspected of any strong sympathy with the Boers ; but that side of the question should be dismissed. He was going to vote against it, because he did not believe that money should be spent in this way. It was not an article on the colony in the ordinary way -- there was too much party in it : it was simply advertising the Administration, and there was nothing to justify the expenditure of this money. He objected to public money being used for paying for advertisements of this character while hopeless widows, whose bread winners had been taken from them, were refused a compassionate allowance. It had been stated that the Government never inter- fered with freedom of speech or opinion in this colony ; but he would point out that, not very long ago, the Railway Review, published in Christchurch, which criticized the adminis- tration of the Railway Department, had re- ceived intimation from the then Minister for VOL. CXVIII .- 46. Railways that, if it did not cease its antagonism to the administrative authorities, it would be refused the list of preferments. Mr SEDDON thought the honourable gentle- man was under a misapprehension. Mr. ELL said he could produce evidence of it ; and he hoped they would not have such another case of gagging on the part of the Go- vernment. Mr. G. J. SMITH (Christchurch City) was going to vote for the striking out of the item on the general grounds stated by the member for Wellington City (Mr. Hutcheson). The pro- Boer phase of the question had nothing to do with the matter. He did not believe that any member of the Ministry would knowingly give an adver- tisement to any paper opposed to the British Government, or in any way traitorous in its utterances. It seemed to him that where the Government had made a mistake was in getting a gentleman to write this article who had been out of New Zealand for fourteen or fifteen years, while there were in the colony itself very many gentlemen who could write more up-to- date articles concerning it. Either from finan- cial, political, or any other aspect, the subject could have been much better treated by some one in the colony. He thought the amend- ment ought to be in the direction of moving a reduction by £1, as an indication that they did not approve of what had been done in this par- ticular matter ; but, as the honourable gentle- man had moved it, he was bound to support it. Mr. Fitchett, theeditor of the Review of Reviews, was well known throughout the whole of Aus- tralasia as a whole-hearted Imperialist ; he had done a great deal for the Empire, and was loyal to our Empire in every way. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said the member for Auckland City (Mr. Fowlds) and the member for Lyttelton, Mr. Laurenson, had stated they originally intended to vote for Mr. Hutcheson's amendment, but that in conse- quence of the character of the speeches made by those supporting that amendment they had changed their intention, and now intended to vote the other way. Strange to say, he was following exactly the contrary course, so that it could never again be said that speech in that House had never altered a vote. The Premier had characterized those who had chosen to exercise an independent opinion and exercised their freedom of speech as having taken part in an impeachment of the Government. There- fore, to indulge in freedom of speech was to impeach the Government. What was the use of expressing an opinion as to the wisdom of spending this money on the R. view of R.rieus, seeing that the money was spent? If the honourable gentleman s desire was to advertise this country in England, why not have sent to England, not 10,000 copies of the Review of Reviews, but 10,000 copies of that pretty little brochure which has been so well produced by our own printing department, and edited by Mr. Loughnan, a publication which was a credit to the country? What had advertised the Colony of New Zealand throughout the world, and in England in particular, more than any. 
<page:730>
thing else, was the action and conduct and bravery of the men we had sent to South Africa. He would now vote with his colleague, Mr. Hutcheson, in consequence of the change of attitude and sacrifice of principle of the mem- ber for Auckland City. (Mr. Fowlds), and the member for Lyttelton, Mr. Laurenson. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) said, If the Government really wanted to give the colony a good advertisement. the best medium for doing so would be by sending a few thousand copies of the "New Zealand Official Year book "-a book containing most valuable, reliable, and useful information -- to the libraries and reading- rooms of England. As for the article under discussion, he would like to say that the plates were hardly those that were likely to attract people to the colony for settlement purposes. Such plates should have been sent with the letterpress as would have attracted attention to those matters of greatest interest in New Zealand-the health resorts, exports, imports, and manufactures, and such like great charac- teristics of the colony. For that reason, he said the money was unwisely expended. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) said the Premier had accused him of calling the Govern- ment pro-Boer. What he said was that Mr. Stead was a pro-Boer, and the Government ought to have known what his position was before they inserted an advertisement in a paper of which he was chief editor, and of which Mr. Fitchett was only editor of the Australasian edition. He held in his hand the Australian . edition of the Review of Reviews of August last. At the bottom of the table of contents this ap-  peared : "W. H. Fitchett, B.A., LL.B., editor for Australia ; W. T. Stead, editor English Review of Reviews ; Dr. Albert Shaw, editor American Review of Reviews." Speaking as a printer, he could say from the make-up of   the paper that a large portion of the matter in the Australasian Review of Reviews had been taken bodily from the English Review of Re- views. Under these circumstances, what con- clusion was to be drawn except that Stead was still connected with this paper, and that there was a co-partnership. So that, although the colonial edition might have been separated from the parent concern in order to get rid of the stigma attaching to Stead's name, the businesses were identical. He had never accused the Premier of disloyalty. The Pre- mier's career would give the lie at once to such a suggestion. What he complained of was that the Government, which ought to have known all that private members knew of the relation of Stead to this paper, should have been so foolish as to play into the hands of England's enemies by spending #260 on a paper with which a pro-Boer was undoubtedly connected. The Government had not exercised reasonable caution in the matter, but had committed an act of misjudgment. Nor did he think the form of advertisement was the best that could have been obtained. He considered the ex- penditure unwise and extravagant, and that the money could have been better spent through New Zealand journals. Mr. Fisher waste of nearly four hours in the discussion of the motion to strike off the item of $260 for the useless distribution of ten thousand copies of the Review of Reviews. It seemed to him there was no use in members keeping silent in order to permit business to proceed. The matter was one that ought to have been settled within a few minutes. Pro-Boer arguments had nothing whatever to do with this question. He objected to this item quite apart from the question of Mr. Stead's disloyalty, or the Boers, or any- thing of that sort. He objected to the thing for itself, because it was wrong, and a worse than useless expenditure. As an advertise- ment for the colony it was a discredit to us. They had had these same Fiji pictures ad nauseam in all sorts of ways, and they were not references to New Zealand at all. The letterpress, moreover, was written by a stran- ger to New Zealand, and was largely laudatory of an individual. He also objected to its stale- ness ; it was more than two months after the original circulation of the Reri-w that members had received copies from the Premier. He would vote against the item. Mr. SEDDON said this was a deliberate attempt to place the Government in a false position, and they would see when the vote was taken that every member of the Opposi- tion would vote with the member for Welling- ton City (Mr. Hutcheson). In previous years no objection had been taken to the action of the Government in sending thousands of copies of the Christmas number of the Canterbury Times and other newspapers published in the colony Home to England in order to advertise this country. There was no authority for it, and yet not a single protest was raised in the House. He could understand the Opposition trying to discredit the Government and the Premier, but it was no pleasure to him to be defending the Government and himself against those who were in the House to support the If the Government and the Liberal party. alleged offending had been one of great moment he could have understood the action taken ; but, when it was such a small thing as an expendi- ture of $260 for what the Government believed to be in the interest of the colony, it was only to be expected that the Government should resent this kind of thing. Already it bad cost, perhaps, more than $260 to report the debate which had taken place on the question. By striking out this item, seeing that the liability had been incurred, and, as he believed, the money had been expended, what would follow ? Mr. HERRIES said, Ministers would have to pay it out of their own pockets. Mr. SEDDON said, Just so ; that was pro- bably what the Opposition intended. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) said, With regard to this vote, he did not think for a moment that the Premier himself had any recollection, when he gave the order, of Mr. Stead's connection with the Review of Reviews. He did not think that had ever entered the honourable gentle- man's head. Mr. SEDDON said, No, it did not. 
<page:731>
Mr. PIRANI did not think any member of the House had said the Premier had acted in this way other than innotently. He considered that if the Premier had taken that fact into consideration he would not have given the order. It was one of those things which were done without consideration, and yet were dan- gerous things to do. The Government had made a great mistake in circulating .this pub- lication broadcast as they did. What they ought to have done was to have sent Home some of the much better printed, much better written and illustrated publications which were produced in this colony. Mr. SEDDON asked if Mr. Pirani 12.0. would give his version of the separa- tion of the Australasian from the English pub- lication. Mr. PIRANI said his recollection was that it did not occur until after the January publication. He was, however, quite sure that that phase of the question never entered the mind of the Premier, and that the Premier erred uninten- tionally. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said that he moved . the amendment, first of all, be- cause the Review of Reviews was not a New Zealand production, and the effect it would have on the mind of any one reading it would be that we in this colony had no one with the literary ability to write the article, and had not the mechanical appliances for the preparation of the blocks. That was his first reason. His second reason was that the pictures given were absolutely misleading, and had no relevancy with the letterpress. No one unacquainted with the colony would know whether Levuka . was in New Zealand or New Zealand was in Levuka. Mr. HASELDEN (Patea) intended to vote against the item because it was utterly useless. No advertisement would do the country any good. The country had been advertised so badly by enormous loans and its labour laws, resulting in industrial strife, that no advertis- ing would do it any good. He acquitted the Premier of knowing that Mr. Stead was con- nected with the paper when he inserted the article ; but he should vote against the item, as he believed the expenditure useless. If Mr. Stead and a few others who thought with him had been hanged, then, no doubt, a great many lives of both Boers and British would have been spared. The money would have been much better spent on roads and bridges. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said that, though the article which had been referred to was headed " New Zealand," it roamed all over the Pacific. Other articles mentioned dealt with the countries respecting which they were written, but this was not so in the case of the article on New Zealand, and, as had been pointed out, a large portion of the Australasian edition of the Review of Reviews had been taken direct from the English edition. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) concurred in the expression of opinion given by the member for Nelson City, and he hoped the Premier would take the advice of the honourable member for , . Wellington City (Mr. Fisher), because there were several members of his party who were not going to surrender their liberties. Per- sonally, he was absolutely independent, to take ' what course he thought best in the interest of the colony, and was under no obligation to the Premier. In regard to the article in the Review of Reviews of January last, he knew Mr. Berry personally and held a high opinion of bim. The article was a fairly .good one, but the pictures were more in keeping with a second-class Christy Minstrel entertainment, and did not do credit to the manly form of the Premier. He would vote for the striking-out of the item. New Zealand did not require to be advertised in this way, as it was already sufficiently adver- tised by her contingents-whose praises were spoken of in every part of Britain-also by the annual issues of the "New Zealand Official Year-book," which was largely circulated in the Old Country, and by other statistical publica- tions. He also understood that Mr. Loughnan, a journalist of high standing, was now engaged on a work in connection with the Royal visit. What more then, was wanted, and where was this expenditure going to end? On behalf of his constituents he protested against it. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) was under the impression that the sending of our contingents to South Africa was a proof of our patriotism, and it was a most contemptible thing to de- scribe it as an advertisement. The Committee divided on the question, "That the item be omitted." AYES, 19. Atkinson Rhodes Hardy Haselden Russell, G. W. Bollard Smith, G. J. Collins Lang Lethbridge Ell Tellers. Fisher Massey Fraser, W. Hutcheson Monk Pirani Graham Meredith. NOES, 37. Allen, E. G. Hall-Jones Parata Arnold Seddon Heke Barclay Hornsby Stevens Houston Bennet Symes Kaihau Buddo Tanner Carncross Thompson, R. Lawry Carroll Ward McGowan Mckenzie, R. Willis Colvin Witheford. Flatman McNab Fowlds Millar Fraser, A. L. D. Mills Tellers. Gilfedder Hogg O'Meara Hall Laurenson. Palmer PAIRS. For. Against. Field Allen, J. Herries Duncan Mackenzie, T. Morrison Smith, E. M. McGuire Russell, W. R. Mclachlan Thomson, J. W. Wilford. Majority against, 18. Amendment negatived. 
<page:732>
Mr. SEDDON said he had been requested by his colleagues to ma e a statement. ception had been taken to the photographs that appeared in the Review of Reviews on various grounds. He happened to be away at the time, and his colleagues made the selection of these photographs, and sent them away, and he never knew which were selected until they were in the paper. He had stood the brunt of the attack to-night, and last night he had stood a good deal, and he made this announce- ment now He did not care who it came from, but he would not allow anything to be said against himself or to go into Hansard without having something to say on it. He meant to fight his battles here as in the past and during his lifetime; and what had been done was well considered, and the Government had nothing to regret. Mr. G. J. SMITH moved, That the item be reduced by £1, as an indication that the ex- penditure was unnecessary. The Committee divided. AYES, 22. Atkinson Fowlds Lang Bollard Fraser, W. Laurenson Collins Hardy Lethbridge Haselden Ell Massey Meredith Hutcheson Fisher  END OF ONE-HUNDRED-AND-EIGHTEENTH VOLUME. By Authority JOHN MACKAY. Government Printer, Wellington. Monk Tellers. Russell, G. W. Graham Pirani Ex- Tanner. Smith, G. J. Rhodes NOES, 33. Allen, E. G. Parata Hogg Arnold Hornsby Seddon Houston Bennet Stevens Kaihau Buddo S\\mes Lawry Thompson, R. Carneross McGowan Ward Carroll Mckenzie, R. Willis Colvin Witheford. McNab Flatman Mills Teilers. Gilfedder Hall Barclay O'Meara Fraser, A. L. D. Palmer H ll-Jones Heke PAIRS. For. Against. Allen, J. Field Herries Duncan Mackenzie, T. Morrison McGuire Smith, E. M. Russell, W. R. McLachlan Wilford. Thomson, J. W. Majority against, 11. Amendment negatived, and item agreed to. Progress reported. The House adjourned at five minutes to one o'clock a.m. (Thursday). 
