<page>557</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=577</url>
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. Tuesday, 17th September, 1901. Mackenzie and Colonel Fraser. The Hon. the SPEAKER took the chair at PRAYERS. DEATH OF PRESIDENT MCKINLEY. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER. - Sir, I desire to move the following motion, which I have no doubt honourable gentlemen will accept : That a respectful address be presented to His Excellency the Governor requesting His Excel- lency to convey to His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Colonics, for presenta- tion to the Government of the United States of America, the following resolution, namely : That the Legislative Council of New Zealand ex- presses its sorrow at the sad and melancholy death of the President of the United States of America, William Mckinley, and sincerely sympathizes with the people of the United States, and offers heartfelt condolence with Mrs. Mckinley and the relatives of the late Presi- dent, and joins with the English-speaking people throughout the world in deploring the calamity that by his demise has eventuated. Sir, last week we passed a resolution expressing our abhorrence of the crime which had been, we hoped then, only attempted. During the few days that have since elapsed we know that the heartfelt prayers and aspirations of nearly the whole world have been offered up on behalf of the life that, unfortunately, has now departed. It is almost impossible to express in language that is befitting the occasion what every right-minded man must feel at such times. One knows that misguided men in some of the older countries of the world, where irresponsible government still con- tinues, and where long-felt grievances may exist-certain men may think it right to make a law unto themselves, and to take to themselves the right of striking at a ruler or any of his family. That they should strike at the elected head of a free Republic such as the United States of America is a matter not only of abhorrence, but absolutely of astonish- ment, because the people of America have got power in their own hands to elect whom they please. They have got the power of making laws to govern themselves in an intelligent and liberal manner, and there is no possibility 
<page>558</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=578</url>
minded he may be, feeling there is a wrong without a remedy. Therefore, it is all the more incomprehensible that misguided men should imagine that they have a right to cut short a life such as the life that has now been extinguished in so melancholy a manner. The late President was a gentleman of most honour- able antecedents, antecedents which did him credit. Not only in a civil capacity, but also in a military capacity, he had done his best to cement the Republic in war, and, since the conclusion of the war, in peace he had devoted his best energies to the good of his country. He had been for the second time returned as elective President of that Republic, and this is the end. Sir, I am quite certain the Council will join unanimously in voting the resolution which I have just read. The Hon. Mr. McLEAN .- Sir, I beg to second the resolution, and I feel I cannot add very much to the sentiments expressed in the speech just delivered by the Hon. the Minister of Education. Since the a tempt was made on the life of the President, we have all hoped day after day that his life would be spared. He has been a good President, an able adminis- trator, a good husband, and a good citizen ; and it is not well to lose such a man as this, whose virtues were so great as were those of the late President. America, in my opinion, owes a great deal to him, and if he had been spared, Sir, to my mind there would have been a. lot of reforms that would have been fraught with benefits, not only for the people of America, but for the other countries, where his influence would undoubtedly be felt. It is, as the Hon.  the Minister has said, an extraordinary thing, in a free country, where those in power are elected by the people, that one should be found to com- mit such a dastardly outrage. Such people have #cc-zero other means, as the people of most countries have, of getting what they require, if they wish it, in a constitutional way. Now that these crimes are becoming so common, I hope that severe steps will be taken in every country to deal with such offenders. Under the existing law in America one does not know how long it may be before this man is brought to justice, and one must feel that, if ever there was an occasion when mob law was justified, it would be justified now in getting hold of such a man, for a short death is too good for a criminal of that description. I hope it will be a long time before we shall hear of such another catastrophe as this. I think it is well that we have now the opportunity to express our sympathy with Mrs. Mckinley and the American people. The Hon. Mr. T. KELLY .- I cannot allow this motion to pass without individually ex- pressing my sympathy. It is indeed pitiful that such a man should have passed away under such circumstances. Both the people and the laws of America and England are almost identical, and it will, therefore, come with a very good grace from us to pass the re- solution now proposed. There can be no doubt that the lives of us all are subject at any time to the attacks of fanatics, and no law will Hon. Mr. W. C. Walker meting out severe punishment to such crimi- nals, is to endeavour, by enacting just and equal laws, and by promoting general education, to teach them to do better. Now, I think it would be a grand idea if the son of our King could see his way to visit the United States and represent His Majesty on the occasion of the State funeral. I feel that such practical sympathy would reach the hearts of the Ameri- can people. That nation, standing shoulder to shoulder with ours, would assure the peace of the world. ## THE LATE MR. M. J. S. MACKENZIE, AND COLONEL FRASER. The Hon. Mr. W. C. WALKER .- In moving the adjournment of the Council, I desire to say also a few words on two deaths that, I am sorry to say, have occurred recently. I refer to the death of the late Mr. Scobie Mackenzie, and also, I am sorry to add-for I have only heard of it since I came into the Chamber-the death of the late Serjeant-at-Arms, Colonel William Fraser. Both gentlemen were well known to most of us for many years. I entered Parlia- ment with Mr. Scobie Mackenzie in 1884, when we were associated at the beginning of that session by having to move and second the Ad- dress in Reply ; and since that time, however we may have differed in politics, we were friends to the day he left Parliament ; and none of us who knew him, either in the House or in his lighter moments, could help enjoying the many shades of temperament of which he was the pos- sessor. It is a terrible thing, to me at all events, that a life that might have produced maturer fruits, had he been spared, should have been prematurely cut off. I feel quite certain that this Council sympathizes most deeply with his family on the present occasion. As regards our old friend Colonel Fraser, who also was an old member of Parliament, as well as an officer of the other House, he has been familiarly known to us for many years : but his services in Parliament were only the end of an honourahje career which he began at the time of the Maori war. I feel quite certain that the sympathy of this Chamber will also be extended to his widow. I beg to move the adjournment of the Council. The Council adjourned at ten minutes to three o'clock p.m. # HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. Tuesday, 17th September, 1901. First Readings-Death of President Mckinley-the late Mr. M. J. S. Mackenzie and the late Nr. A. J. Burns-The late Colonel Fraser-Funeral of the late President Mckinley -Radways State- ment -Mines Statement-Supply. 
<page>559</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=579</url>
Mr. DEPUTY-SPEAKER took the chair at half- | a policy of expansion and extension. The past two o'clock. PRAYERS. FIRST READINGS. Pariroa Native Reserve Bill, Old-age Pen- sions Bill. DEATH OF PRESIDENT MCKINLEY. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- Sir, I rise to move, That a respectful address be presented to His Excellency the Governor, requesting His Excel- lency to convey to His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, for pre- sentation to the Government of the United States of America, the following resolution, namely : "That the House of Representatives of New Zealand expresses its sorrow at the sad and melancholy death of the President of the United States of America, William Mckinley, and sincerely sympathizes with the people of the United States, and offers heartfelt condolence with Mrs. Mckinley and the relatives of the late President, and joins with the English- speaking people throughout the world in de- ploring the calamity that by his demise has eventuated." When moving a motion in the House a few days ago expressing our con- dolence with Mrs. Mckinley and the people in the United States, there was a general feeling of pleasure amongst members, for it was thought the wounds would not prove fatal, and the sufferer would recover. But such was not to be ; death has intervened, and the United States and the rest of the civilised world are losers indeed. Sir, it was a sad and melancholy ending for the great statesman who has just passed away. He deserved a  better fate ; but by his death a lesson has been taught. We one and all fervently hope and pray that it may be the means of preventing a repeti- tion of such a thing in the future, and, if pos- sible, rendering it almost beyond the means of persons to form associations against organized society and to publicly express their dastardly objects. It is to be hoped the outcome of this dastardly deed may be the suppression of existing evils which are a menace to society. In the meantime a nation mourns the loss of one of her greatest sons. As soldier, finan- cier, and statesman, the late President McKin- ley attained success, and well-merited .praise from his fellow-man, and his public and private life was a glorious example to follow. He had to fight his way up from amongst his fellows, for he was not blessed with advantages that are pos- sessed by many. Entering the lower rungs as a soldier, we find that by his devotion, energy, and courage he attained a very high rank in the army. We then find that by his application and indomitable energy and de- termination he rose to a high position in the legal profession. Although many may differ from him as a financier, still his name is as- sociated with the finances of America in a more conspicuous manner than that of any We admire him most as other statesman. a far-seeing statesman, and we find that during his term of presidency there has been United States has taken its place, and a foro- most place, amongst the great nations of the . world. When it was necessary to take this new departure there was no hesitation on the part of the deceased statesman. When it came to relieving oppression in Cuba, when it came to removing a weakness at Hawaii, and also when the Philippines question had to be faced, we find that he had no hesitation in carrying out the will of the people who placed him in his high position. There may have been differences of opinion in respect to the expansion policy of the United States, but the will of the great majority has been given effect to. Sir, we deplore the calamity that has overtaken our kindred, the people of the United States, who are of the English-speaking race. We know that those in the United States are our kindred. They speak our language; they are our friends, and together we mourn and are grieved at the loss that we as a race have sus- tained. But whilst our condolence goes forth to the United States and its people, we also at the same time tender our sincere and heartfelt sympathy to that good wife, to whom the late President gave a whole - souled life - devotion that in itself is sufficient to commend him to our good wishes and to our admiration. In itself it is a trait in the character of the man as showing his great kindness and love, and a glorious example that should be followed by all men. On the other hand, we have in the suffering widow at the present time one who by her devotion and her great love and sup- port-we have, I say, a trait that we can well understand and appreciate. I think the few words that passed between them almost at the very last moment, when all hope was gone, must have struck home to the hearts of all those who read them. And, when the final end came, his last words, "God's will be done," were a fitting closing scene in the life of one of the greatest statesmen of modern times. I repeat that one and all deplore the great loss the world has sustained, and our regret is all the more seeing that the ending came in the manner it did. Sir, I feel assured, in passing now the resolution before us, and in expressing, as we do sincerely, our sympathy with the nation and with the bereaved ones in their irreparable loss, it may, and we hope will, have the effect of assuaging to some extent their grief and profound sorrow -a grief and sorrow we all share, and a loss the civilised world deplores. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin). - I rise, Sir, to second the motion, and I need hardly say that I agree with every word which has just fallen from the Premier. Sir, the British people and the people of the United States may not always see eye to eye; they may perhaps look on inter- national questions from different points of view ; there may be on occasions, perhaps, a certain amount of friction between them, but when the real trouble comes to one or the other they forget their little differences, and they remember that, though their forms of government may differ, the same blood runs in the veins of both. 
<page>560</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=580</url>
mourning for the loss of its principal citizen, a man who by his many admirable qualities had endeared himself to the right - thinking people of the whole of Christendom, and who has been suddenly stricken down by the hand of a foul assassin, the British people feel what has happened, they feel the loss of a great and good man, they feel the dastardly crime that has been committed almost keenly as the American people themselves. And when we pass, Sir, unanimously, as we will, the resolution which has been moved by the Premier, it will be no empty form, but the sincerest possible expression of sympathy and sorrow from this Parliament and from the people of the country as a whole. Sir, the people of this colony have watched with anxiety during the last week when the life of the Pre- sident lay trembling in the balance-we watched with anxiety, and we hoped that his life would be spared for much future usefulness. But it was not to be. An inscrutable Providence had ruled otherwise. His time had come ; and we can only now look back with admiration upon the patience and courage with which he met his end. Sir, the great Republic of the United States has been blessed with many noble men as Presidents, but the name of William McKin- ley will be remembered not only by the people of America, but also by the people of the British Empire, to whom he has proved himself a true friend, as a brave man, a Christian gentleman, and a distinguished statesman. I second the motion. Resolution agreed to. THE LATE MR. M. J. S. MACKENZIE AND THE LATE MR. A. J. BURNS. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- Mr. Speaker, I now rise to move the following resolution : "That this House desires to place on record its regret at the death of the late Mackay John Scobie Mackenzie, and appreciation of his services as a member of the House of Repre- sentatives, and tenders to Mrs. Mackenzie and the members of his family its sincere sympathy and condolence." Sir, I am sure that the members present will join with me in ex- pressing unfeigned regret at the death of our late comrade. When I look across to the place where he sat, and which will know him no more, and think that he was there only a short time ago, and that he had only arrived at mature manhood- that he has passed away- it makes me feel sad in the extreme ; and, as one who has had many a wordy tilt with him who has departed, I can only look back now and feel pleasure at the thought that, whatever may have been our differences of opinion, no personal feelings remained. He was a man possessed of considerable ability, and of great devotion to his district and to the colony ; and the great ability he possessed was placed unreservedly at the service of his fellow- colonists. I regret exceedingly that he has been called away. Whether as a member of Parlia- ment, or as a journalist, or a colonist we ap- Freciated the thoroughness with which he Mr. Massey his death. We all deplore that he should have been taken away, as I have said, in the prime of his manhood ; and so far as in our power lies we earnestly desire to assuage the grief of the bereaved ones, and tender to them our heartfelt sympathy and condolence. We shall miss the services of Mr. Scobie Mackenzie, as the colony has missed them for some time past. Sir, I shall ever recollect his good - natured banter as and his keen satire. However, even among those from whom he differed he was personally very much liked, and one and all in this House, I am sure, regretted to hear of his death, and will join with me in carrying this resolution, and tendering to his widow and family our heart- felt sympathy and condolence in the great and irreparable loss they have sustained. Sir, I move the motion. Mr. J. ALLEN (Bruce). - I suppose that Scobie Mackenzie was best known to us as a member of Parliament, and I do not suppose that any member of Parliament who was here when Scobie was in the House can forget those occasions on which he was wont to make what was considered at the time a great speech. He used to hit hard, but he always hit hard in the face. The Right Hon. the Premier said he used sarcasm. Perhaps he did. I rather think the word that expresses more adequately what he used is " raillery." He was humorous ; he was witty. His speeches told in the House : but where they did tell with most effect was on the public platform. Sir, though he did hit hard in the House, there was no man I ever came across who was so generous to his oppo- nents outside the House. I know that in our own counsels, in our own discussions pri- vately, and in our talks about individuals op- posed to us in politics, there never was a man who was more generous than he was, and it seemed only natural to him to pick out not that which was bad in his opponent, but that which was good, and invariably from Scobie Mackenzie in our talks came remarks most favourable to any man who was opposed to him. Sir, he was a literary man in two aspects. He was literary in the sense that he loved literature and loved reading for its own sake, and he got all the benefit that could be derived from reading. He read with care. . He collated what was worth collating of that which he did read, and I do not know that I can express more clearly what his attitude towards literature was than by quoting from one of his own favourite authors :- I have sent books and music there, and all Those instruments with which High Spirits call The future from its cradle, and the past Out of its grave, and make the present last In thought and joys which sleep, but cannot die. Folded within their own eternity. Sir, of his work as a literary man I will say nothing to-day ; I leave it for history to say of what value it may be. Sir, those who knew him other than in the House of Representatives knew him to be a man of character that was most invaluable. His social life and his home life formed a picture one could dwell upon with delight and joy. I know of no man, either 
<page>561</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=581</url>
mill at Mosgiel was started. These are two of at the dinner-table or in the Whip's room or the many public things in which the late Mr. lobby, or in any other place of conversation, Burns took an interest. I may say that Mr. who was more pleasing to listen to or who was Burns was closely related to the Scottish bard. so witty and humorous as Scobie Mackenzie. His grandfather, Mr. Gilbert Burns, was a Sir, in his own home life I never came across a brother of the poet. His father, the Rev. Dr. man who had exactly the same attitude towards Burns, came out in the first ship, the " Philip his wife and children as Scobie Mackenzie had. Laing," and was well known and much re- I could not call it the aspect of father to child : spected in the early days of the Otago Settle- it was more like brother to brother or sister ; ment. As Mr. Scobie Mackenzie and Mr. Arthur and it was one of the most astonishing things Burns, both ex-members of this House, hap- to me, and, I believe, to those who knew him, pened strangely enough to die on the same day, that attitude of his, particularly towards his it seemed to me only right that I should take children. Sir, he has gone, and I am quite sure advantage of this occasion to say a word in the House and country will grieve over the loss of a politician and literary man. I am quite memory of the late Mr. Burns. sure he was a man who had to a considerable to add to the remarks of the member for Bruce extent made his mark in New Zealand politics. would merely be to dim the picture-a picture He was a man who could enjoy life, he was a so admirably drawn by one who was for so man of deep feelings, he was a man of know- many years a close and intimate personal ledge ; and, Sir, I am pleased to say he was a friend. Speaking of the late Mr. Mackenzie man of reasonable fear. Sir, I will end what I have to say by quoting again from the same author, of whom he was so fond :- Death has set his mark and seal On all we are and all we feel, On all we know and all we fear. First our pleasures die-and then Our hopes, and then our fears-and when These are dead, the debt is due, Dust claims dust-and we die too. Mr. MILLAR (City of Dunedin) .- Sir, I would just like to say a word or two on the present occasion, as the late Scobie Mackenzie and myself were brother representatives for the City of Dunedin during last Parliament. Sir, by the death of Scobie Mackenzie, Dunedin has received a blow, and his loss will be felt from a public point of view. Sir, during the three years that we sat together here, although we  opposed each other. on almost every public question, the honourable gentleman was the soul of honour in every respect. He never at any time, although a strong party man, tried to further his party at the expense of the party which I represented, and upon all occasions he was what you might call strictly fair and impartial in all his actions. Of a genial dis- position, he was one who soon made friends with those with whom he came in contact, and I am confident I am expressing the opinion of my present colleagues when I express our heart- felt sympathy with Mrs. Mackenzie and family in the irreparable loss we have all sustained. Mr. J. W. THOMSON (Clutha) .- Sir, I agree with everything that has been said regarding the late Mr. Scobie Mackenzie, and I do not rise to refer to him at all. Mr. Mackenzie died last Sunday morning, and it is not a little curious that another ex-member of this House also died last Sunday morning. I refer to the late Mr. Arthur Burns, who was a member of this House many years ago. Mr. Burns was a man who took an active interest in public affairs. He was brought up to maritime pur- suits, and this led him to take a great interest in all matters relating to seafaring life. He, for instance, strongly advocated the erection of a lighthouse on the Snares, a work which has not yet been entered upon, but which will have to be undertaken some day or other. It was Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) .- I feel that as a member of this House, I indorse every word uttered by the honourable member for Bruce. In debate, whether important or un- important, he always added lightness, geniality, good-feeling, frankness, and every attribute that could emanate from a generous-hearted man. True, at times he was severe. He and I more than any other members, I think, during the time we were together in this House, and that was very many years, dealt dexterously and fearlessly in the sabre-cuts of Anglo-Saxon speech, but after every debate we were met with the cheery, jovial, good-natured joke which always turned the edge of anger. I feel that I add nothing to the delicacy of the picture drawn by the honourable member for Bruce, but I could not allow the occasion to pass without saying a few words in recollection of an esteemed and genial friend. He was one of the literary orna- ments of the House, and that literary quality is a feature which I say with some little feeling of regret is fast disappearing from the debates which take place in this Chamber. It may be that the members of the present day are of what may be called a more practical turn of mind ; but Mr. Scobie Mackenzie was one of that class of men who make you at once feel that you are in the society of a man of educa- tion, refinement, and culture. I am glad to feel that the widow and children of Mr. Mackenzie will recognise that his memory has been held in affectionate remembrance. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- I had intended later on to have referred to the late Mr. Arthur Burns. It is a strange and sad coin- cidence that he and the late Mr. Mackenzie should have passed away on Sunday last ; and, as reference has already been made to this, I think now is an opportune time for saying, in regard to those who have taken their part in the past history of the colony-practically laying the foundation, a safe foundation, upon which the country has progressed-that when their end comes, although they have been for some years away from our political life, their services should not be forgotten. I am pleased that the honourable member for Clutha has 
<page>562</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=582</url>
Burns really did excellent work. The connec- tion of his name with the woollen industry of this colony should stand in bold relief. He was never self-seeking-quite the reverse, and as such was respected by all who had the pleasure of his acquaintance. It is only a short time ago that I received from him a very nice letter indeed, and it will be, I think, some consolation to the children who are left to mourn the loss of so good a parent to know that, although he has not taken part in public life for some years, their worthy father's services and good work had not been forgotten. His son, Surgeon- Major Burns, is with our sons who are fighting the battles of the Empire in South Africa ; and that the name of his father should be men- tioned with admiration and respect here will to some extent soften the blow that has fallen upon him and his brothers and sisters. I am pleased that the resolution dealing with the late Mr. Mackenzie should have been chosen as a fitting time to mention the name of the late Mr. Burns. Motion agreed to. THE LATE COLONEL FRASER. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- I rise, Sir, to move, "That this House desires to place on record its regret at the death of the late Colonel William Fraser, and its appreciation of his ser- vices as a member of the House of Representa- tives, and tenders to Mrs. Fraser its sincere sympathy and condolence." Just as I was coming into the House with the two other resolutions I received the following telegram :- " Our old friend Colonel Fraser passed away at half-past ten this morning. I know we have your sympathy." Sir, the genial old Colonel has gone to his long home. Good-natured and generous to a fault, we all knew him well and respected him. I have said "generous to a fault." Looking back over the many years of my life as a mem- ber of Parliament, I can say that from the time I knew Colonel Fraser to the time I said " Good-bye," when he was leaving for home & short time ago, the greatest friendship has existed between us. I remember him, Sir, in the past, and, when in 1887 misfortune had befallen our party in the loss of our respected leader, the late Colonel Fraser was the first to offer to resign his seat so that the party might have its leader in Parliament. I also remember him in connection with goldfields matters. There was no member from the diggings, and in the early days, with his experience as a Warden, and there was no member in our Parliament in those times who knew more or could be taken as a safer guide in respect to goldfields matters than the late Colonel Fraser. Then, we must not forget that he fought the battles of our colony, and rose to the rank by which he is known- that is, Colonel. That he was a brave leader one and all must admit. As a genial member for the Thames, and as our Serjeant-at-Arms, members will miss him ; and more especially does the event seem sad under the existing cir- Nr. Seddon good wife, who has been with him for over fifty years, during the session before last met with a severe accident. She has practically been on a bed of sickness from that time up to the pre- sent, and will never again be able to move about. The Colonel suffered very much during the latter part of his days; yet, though weak and ill, members must have seen him here trying to do his duty, and there was a general feeling that he should go back to his home and not remain here, for all could see the end was not far off. Although there was considerable difficulty in getting him home, he managed to get there ; and he has died in his place at home in the presence of her who has been with him so many years. It will be some consolation to her, and tend to soften the irreparable loss she has sustained, if we place this resolution on record, and I am sure it will be carried unani- mously by members of the House. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) .- Sir, I did not hear until after the right honourable gentle- man commenced his speech of the death of our old friend Colonel Fraser, and it therefore came as a great shock to me, as it must to other mem- bers. He has been living in the part of the colony I live in ever since I have been in the colony, and for many years I was a constituent of his, and he for a long time represented a great portion of the district I now represent. In travelling round my district I can realise the great attention he paid to the wishes of those whom he represented. Throughout the Thames, Te Aroha, and Bay of Plenty districts there is only one opinion, and that is that they have never had a better representative than the late Colonel Fraser. As the Premier has alluded to his sad end, I trust I may be permitted to say how distressing it is to myself and others, who know how he had filled some of the highest offices and had been one of the greatest men a: the Thames, to see him die with his wife an in- valid and he himself in the circumstances men- tioned by the Premier. This adds a tinge of melancholy to the whole affair. I agree with everything that the Premier has said with regard to the personal qualities of the deceased gentleman, and I can only add that no one will regret the death of Colonel Fraser more than will his late constituents in the Thames and Bay of Plenty districts. Mr. McGOWAN (Minister of Mines) .- During the last thirty years I have perhaps been more intimately acquainted with the late Colonel Fraser than any other member of the House. I may be permitted to say that not only in this House will his erect and familiar figure be missed, but in the district where he lived so long, and where he was so well known. I can only add my testimony to all that has been said by the Right Hon. the Premier and Mr. Herries, the honourable member for the Bay of Plenty, in eulogy of the late Colonel Fraser as a man, a gentleman, a politician, and a soldier. No truer politician could there be than the late honourable gentleman for his party, and that is not a reflection on him, nor is it a reflection 
<page>563</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=583</url>
on any man engaged in public life. I can only against. That showed the absolute soundness say that during all the long years I have known the late Colonel Fraser he has always been admired in the district and amongst the people who knew him best. This is proven by the fact that he was frequently returned to the House for the old Thames electorate, and was elected as Mayor of Thames on several occasions, filling the chair with satisfaction to the burgesses, despite his enforced absences in Wellington for considerable periods while attending to his parliamentary duties. In conclusion, I desire to testify to the great esteem in which the late Colonel Fraser was held in the district 1 have the honour to represent. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) .- I first met the late Colonel Fraser on a memorable occa- sion in September, 1857, at Flemington, Mel- bourne. He was in those days familiarly known as fearless, dauntless " Bill " Fraser. It is a long spell to see a man pass through such a long career and end his days in such an honourable way. The late Colonel Fraser I know best, of course, through his career in this House, and on every occasion he had to speak, and he spoke seldom, his utterances manifested that same dauntless, fearless spirit which was characteristic of him in his younger days. There was never an occasion, as the Premier says, upon which there was a call made upon his manliness, his loyalty, or his fealty to his party upon which that fealty and loyalty were not displayed to the utmost degree. It has been said that his circumstances of late years have not been the most prosperous. But there were days when the late Colonel Fraser was not so unfortunate, when he had the handling of large sums of money, which he spent in an open, free-handed way. Nothing can be said in disparagement of the late Colonel Fraser except that in his day he was too good to his fellow- men, and too neglectful of his own interests. Mr. SEDDON (Premier). -- There is one little matter to which I intended to refer. It is a strange coincidence that the late Scobie Mac- kenzie and the late Colonel Fraser were both together on the same station in the Colony of Victoria in the very early days, and the passing of a similar resolution on the same day in the House of Representatives in New Zealand is also a strange coincidence. I can only say that both of them are called away to their long home, and both leave behind them in our Parliament sorrowing friends and comrades who sympathize deeply with their bereaved relatives, and who will ever respect their memories and cherish in fond recollection their services and good works. Mr. LAWRY (Parnell) .- Sir, I have known the late Colonel Fraser for a period extending over the past twenty-eight years. I first knew him as Warden of the goldfields at the Thames, and it is rather a singular coincidence that last night I received a letter from a very promirent citizen at the Thames referring to the late gentleman's administration of the affairs of the goldfields, and he stated he had been looking at the records, and that during the whole time of the deceased gentleman's administration as of Colonel Fraser's decisions, and the know- ledge he possessed of the affairs he had to administer. A slight reference has been made to the deceased gentleman's loyalty to his party. That was exemplified on one occasion in a most remarkable degree. At the time when the Stout-Vogel Government was in power it can be shown that during the whole of the period of their existence the late Colonel Fraser was never known to have recorded one vote against his party, and his creed was this : "The more the party I have been elected to support are in trouble, the stronger and more consistent will be my support." It is also worth placing on record that, when Sir Robert Stout was defeated in 1887 by my esteemed friend the member for Bruce, directly that information reached Colonel Fraser his loyalty to his party was exemplified in this manner : He sent a wire to the then Premier, Sir Robert Stout, saying in effect, "I consider your exclusion from the counsels of our country will result in national loss, and I am prepared to make a sacrifice ; I will resign my seat at the Thames in your favour, and I will guarantee you will be returned as member for the Thames in my place." That is what I call loyalty to party. I entirely sympathize with every word that has been said relative to the late Colonel Fraser. We knew him latterly in a subordinate position. In his position as Serjeant-at-Arms his actions were characterized by courtesy, fidelity to duty, and a desire to assist every young member, by giving him the benefit of his great experience. In con- clusion, I will only say I wish we had in public life at the present time, and that we may have in public life in the future, more men like the deceased gentleman, Colonel Fraser. Motion agreed to. FUNERAL OF THE LATE PRESIDENT MCKINLEY. Mr. SEDDON (Premier) .- I desire to make a statement in reference to the course I would suggest being taken on the day of the funeral of the late President Mckinley, which is to be Thursday afternoon next. It is my intention to ask the House to adjourn from three o'clock until four o'clock on that afternoon. The member for Ashley has suggested that I should communicate with the Bishop of Wellington and with the heads of the other Churches in this city, and that a Church funeral service be held at Parliament Buildings. I think that is more a matter for the Churches than for the leader of the House or the head of the Go- vernment to deal with. If the front of Par- liament Buildings or Parliament Buildings are desired for the purpose of a service, I shall be most happy, on behalf of members, to give our consent ; but I think the initiative should come from those desirous of holding a general service. At all events, it is my intention to ask the House to adjourn for an hour on Thursday after- noon, from three to four o'clock, and I do not think it would be out of place if the bells 
<page>564</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=584</url>
from those where the sad rites are being per- formed, should take the opportunity of marking our respect in some manner such as I have indicated. I now move, That this House do adjourn till half-past seven o'clock this evening. Motion agreed to. # RAILWAYS STATEMENT. [ For Returns and Tables referred to in this State- ment, see Appendix D .- 2.] The following is the Railways Statement laid upon the table by the Minister for Railways (Sir J. G. WARD) on the 4th September, 1901 :- Mr. Speaker, -In presenting my second Rail- ways Statement, I am very much gratified to have to announce that the year's operations of our railways have again been most satisfactory, and show a very large increase on the business of the preceding year, notwithstanding the fact that the latter was a record year. I purpose subdividing my remarks under six headings-viz., "General," "Earnings," " Working-expenses," " Expenditure for Addi- tions to Open Lines and Rolling-stock charge- able to Capital Account," " Midland Railway," and "Concluding Remarks and Forecast." # 1\. GENERAL. The mileage of line open for traffic at the end of the year under review was 2,212 miles, against 2,104 for the previous year. £1,727,236 The revenue for 1900-1901 was . Against revenue for 1899-1900 1,623,891 An increase of . . £103,345 .. The increases in revenue for the past six years are shown by the following figures :- Year ending 31st March- 1896, over year ending 31st March, 32,190 1895 1897, over year ending 31st March, 103,117 1896 1898, over year ending 31st March, 89,850 1897 1899, over year ending 31st March, 93,657 1898 1900, over year ending 31st March, 154,226 1899 1901, over year ending 31st March, 103,345 1900 .. A total increase of £576,385 .. The working-expenses for 1900-1901 have been 1,127,848 Against ditto for 1899-1900 1,052,358 . . £75,490 An increase of .. . The excess of earnings over working- expenses for 1900-1901 has been 599,389 Against ditto for 1899-1900 571,533 An increased net return ! £27,856 for the year of . . The capital cost of the lines open for traffic Mr. Seddon £17,207,328 for the year under review, and the interest earned thereon has increased from £3.42 per cent. last year to £3.48 per cent. for year ending 31st March, 1901. The interest earned on our lines thus compares very favour- ably with the interest earned on capital cost by the railways in the sister States-viz., Vic- toria 3.07, Queensland 2.67, South Australia 3.51, Tasmania 1.11, New South Wales 3.63, and Western Australia 5.81. (Vide Return No. 15.) The loss on the Kawakawa Section has in- creased from £171 in 1900 to $185 in 1901, while that on the Nelson Section has decreased from £1,648 in 1900 to £1,531 in 1901. The net earnings of the Whangarei, Kaihu, Auck- land, Wellington-Napier-New Plymouth, West- port, Westland, and Picton Sections have increased, and of Hurunui-Bluff Section de- creased. The following extensions were opened for traffic, viz. : Waiotu to Hukerenui, 1 mile 24 chains; Makarau to Tahekeroa, 3 miles 6 chains ; Ranfurly to Wedderburn, 8 miles 34 chains; Invercargill to junction of Sea- ward Bush line, 73 chains; Jackson to Otira, 11 miles 23 chains. (Vide Return No. 22.) The alterations to train services and separa- tion of goods and passenger trains on important lines, as announced in my last Statement, have proved satisfactory and beneficial to the travel- ling public. The journey-times of many of the trains have been materially reduced. I propose gradually extending the system of running separate goods and passenger trains as the business of the colony warrants. It should, however, be borne in mind that services of this description cost a very large sum annually, and can therefore only be granted in cases where the traffic is sufficiently large to pay the in- creased expense, and the convenience of a large section of the travelling community necessitates the separation of the services. I give promin- ence to this matter owing to the continued demands that are made for faster and improved train services on many of the lines in the colony which are already excellently served by the existing arrangements, and on which the traffic neither warrants nor would pay for the ad- ditional trains. To meet the large and growing passenger traffic, and to provide better facilities for the travelling public, it has been found necessary to run additional mixed trains. This increase has not been confined to any particular part of the colony, but has been general to the whole. The mileage run by the additional mixed trains which have been permanently added to the time-table has amounted to 42,686 miles for the year, at a cost of £10,493. The running of the express trains between Auckland and Rotorua has been improved, twenty-five minutes having been taken off the journey. Passengers from Auckland thus reach Rotorua at 4.15 p.m. in place of 4.45 p.m., and leave Rotorua for Auckland at 8.45 a.m. in place of 8.20 a.m. An hour and five minutes has been taken off 
<page>565</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=585</url>
the time occupied by the mail train to do the journey from Wellington to Napier, and the train now leaves Wellington at the convenient hour of 8.20 a.m. in place of 7.15 a.m. Fifty- seven minutes have been taken off the time occupied in doing the journey from Napier to Wellington, and the mail train now leaves Napier at 8.45 a.m. in place of 8.25 a.m., and arrives at Wellington at 7.53 p.m. in place of 8.30 p.m. The passenger - train service to Kingston (Lake Wakatipu) has been improved, forty-five minutes having been taken off the running- time of the through passenger train from Gore to Kingston, the train now arriving at the latter station at 5.30 p.m. in place of 6.15 p.m. ; whilst thirty minutes have been taken off the running-time of the return train from Kings- ton to Gore, the train now leaving the former station at 9 a.m. in place of 8.30 a.m. This enables the connecting steamer to leave Queens- town at 6.30 a.m. in place of 6 a.m. On the Westland Section the train service in connection with the Reefton, Westport, and Nelson coach services has been so improved and arranged that passengers can complete the through journey from Greymouth to West- port in one day in place of two days as for- merly, and from Greymouth to Nelson in two days in place of three days. In order to keep a more effectual check on the late running of trains, I decided early in the year to have a record kept of the arrival of the principal trains at the various termini in the colony. For this purpose the train ser- vices were divided into three groups-the first consisting of express and through passenger trains ; the second, suburban trains, made up of those trains running in connection with suburban city traffic ; the third, country trains, made up of the principal country or long-dis- tance trains. This record has been kept since the 23rd July, 1900, each four-weekly period being shown separately. The following table shows the average late arrival of the trains in each of the separate groups for each period :- Period ending Average for Train 15th Sept. 18th Ang. 10th Nov. 31st Mar. 13th Oct. 2nd Mar. Group. 2nd Feb. 8th Doc. 5th Jan. Passenger 1:36 1:58: 4-23 1:31 2-03: 0.82 1.70 1:97 1.16 0-85 Suburban 1-27 0.76 0-67 0-84 0-91 1:03 0-78: 1.15 0.75 0.90 Country 2:04 1:88, 1:42 1:43 1-5 : 2-79 1.70 2:34. 2:08 1:90 General average for all trains dealt with, 1.48. In all, records have been kept of 167 trains. The late running shown includes delays from all causes, including engine-failures, floods, &c., and gives a general average late arrival at destination of 1.48 minutes for the nine months during which records have been kept. Taking all circumstances into consideration, it must be admitted that the trains have kept excellent time. The work of equipping the rolling-stock with the Westinghouse brake is being proceeded with as rapidly as possible, and it is anticipated that vehicles so fitted will shortly be running on the mail trains to New Plymouth and Napier. Two hundred and three second-class cars have been fitted with cushions during the year. Foot-warmers have also been obtained and supplied to the express trains running in the South Island. The arrangements indicated have added con- siderably to the comfort of passengers, by whom they are much appreciated, and it is intended to extend them until all cars are similarly equipped. The Pintsch system of lighting our carriages continues to give satisfaction, and has been applied to sixty-three cars and vans during the year, making the total number of vehicles now equipped with gas 502. Nearly two million cubic feet of the gas was used for lighting cars during the year, and, notwithstanding the fact that gas-making is divided among five separate works in various parts of the colony, the cost of production of the gas was 64d. per 100 cubic feet less than for the previous year. On the 24th June, 1900, large reductions were made in ordinary and suburban passenger- fares, season ticket rates, and workers' weekly tickets on suburban lines; tourist excursion tickets were made issuable daily throughout the year ; concession of free carriage on return journey was granted to racehorses, hunters, polo- ponies, and to returned empty fish-packages ; while the freight on goods from centres to ports, and also for salt for dairy use, was re- duced. Particulars of other concessions made during the year will be found in Return No. 32. It is estimated that the value of the conces- sions enumerated was equivalent to a rebate of £75,000, based on the existing traffic and charges for the previous year. The result of these reductions, which were forecast in my last year's Statement, has been very satisfactory, and exceeded the most san- guine expectations; the increase in the passen- ger traffic-viz., 775,309 passengers and 19,586 Nine Months. season tickets-being a record one, the increased revenue from these sources being £29.957. Of the ordinary passengers, the increased number from officered stations on suburban lines was 324,565-Auckland, 72,771; Wellington, 70,866 ; Christchurch, 90,737 ; Dunedin, 72,040; Inver- cargill, 18,151. The increased number of season tickets is made up of 81 sectional annual tickets, 231 school tickets, 49 twenty-trip commutation tickets, 18,606 workers' 2s. weekly tickets (sub- urban lines), and 1,331 ordinary season tickets of other descriptions. The actual number of workers' weekly 2s. tickets issued from the 24th June, 1900, to the 31st March, 1901, was 29,258, but there was a decrease of 10,652 ordinary twelve-trip weekly tickets issued during the same period. There were also decreases of five reporters' season 
<page>566</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=586</url>
trip commutation tickets. The popularity of the workers' 2s. weekly tickets for suburban lines and the ready manner in which the workers have availed themselves of the opportunity afforded for travelling at cheap rates between the large cities and their suburbs is a matter for congratulation. It amply demonstrates the wisdom of the provision made, and also the fact that the workers them- selves fully recognise the importance and advan- tages of living outside of the crowded area of the cities, and are prepared to reside in the suburbs provided that facilities are afforded them for travelling to and from their homes and work at a cheap rate and by a convenient train service. An average of 7,793 men were employed on the railways, as compared with 7,236 for the previous year. (Vide Return No. 26.) Of the 2,662 casual labourers employed in the Traffic Branch, and insured against accident at a cost of $541, charged to working-expenses, seventy-nine were injured and received com- pensation during the year. One hundred and seventeen members of the permanent staff resigned, thirty-seven died, thirty-eight were retired, thirty-three were dis- missed, and 631 engaged. Six appeals against decisions of the depart- ment were heard by the Railway Appeal Boards during the year ; five were dismissed and one upheld. The total number of appeals against decisions of the department heard by the Appeal Boards since the passing of "The Go- vernment Railways Department Classification Act, 1896," has been thirty-one, of which six  were upheld and twenty-five dismissed. The number of appeals in connection with the classification since the Act was passed in 1896 has been fifty-seven, of which ten were     upheld and forty-seven dismissed. Substantial concessions in regard to wages and hours of labour have been made to the rail- way staff during the year. The cost of the special allowance of wages (6d. per day) to labourers and others in receipt of 6s. 6d. per day, and for tradesmen and other workshop employés, amounts for the year to $20,951. During the year the sum of £4,253 has been paid as compensation and compassionate allow- ances to members retired from the service and the relatives of deceased members of the service. Six members of the Second Division were promoted to the First Division during the year. The First Division now comprises 1,226 members, of whom 645 have obtained certifi- cates of proficiency in telegraphy, and 566 pro- ficiency in postal work. During the two years ending 31st March, 1901, seven caretakers have been placed in charge of flag-stations. The total number of such stations at which caretakers are employed is now 101. On the 9th April, 1900, an accident of a serious nature resulted from neglect of train- men in charge of a heavy stock train to put down the brakes before train commenced to trucks left the road and were wrecked, guard's assistant being severely injured, and a large number of sheep killed. On the 2nd February, 1901, an accident occurred at Port Chalmers, resulting in injury to five persons who were waiting in the cars of a train standing at the platform, when a goods train from Dunedin ran into the station, against the signals, and collided with the train standing at the plat- form. # 2\. EARNINGS. The gross revenue for the year amounted to £1,727,236, and the net revenue to $599.359, increases over the previous year of $103,345 and $27,856 respectively. The gross revenue has exceeded the estimate by #167,236. In view of the fact that the traffic for the year 1900 was of an exceptional character, the result of the operations for the year under review is eminently satisfactory, more especially when the sweeping character of the reductions in passenger-fares and the large concessions made on other items of traffic are taken into con- sideration. The receipts per train-mile have decreased from 7s. 9d. for 1899-1900 to Ts. 5}d. for 1900- 1901. 775,309 more ordinary passengers were carried during the year under review than for the pre- vious year, the increased revenue derived there- from being £28,259. Season-ticket revenue has also increased by £1,697, and the number of season tickets issued by 19,586. The increased revenue from passenger traffic, therefore, repre- sents an average fare of 8.75d. per head for the 775,309 additional passengers carried, and of 1s. 8%d. per ticket for the increased number of season tickets issued. Ordinary passengers have increased by 14 per cent. during the year, and the revenue derived therefrom by 6 per cent. Holiday, school, and factory excursion traffic still continues to give satisfactory results, the traffic from these sources giving an increased revenue of £7,261 for the year. Coaching traffic, including mails, gave a revenue of $72,712, an increase of $4,224. The increased goods traffic represents 211,813 tons. Of the traffic grouped "under this head wool alone shows a decrease, all other items showing substantial increases. In view of the fact that the grain traffic for 1899-1900 gave the phe- nomenal increase of 343,962 tons as compared with that for 1898-99, the further increase of 8,538 tons for 1900-1901 is very remarkable, the increase in grain traffic for 1901 as com- pared with 1899 being 84 per cent. Live-stock traffic shows increases in cattle, calves, and pigs, and a decrease of 111,596 head in sheep. The total revenue derived from goods and live-stock traffic was £1,109,548, an increase of $69,166 over the receipts for the preceding year. # 3\. EXPENDITURE. The expenditure for working was £1,127,843. equal to 65.30 per cent. of revenue, an increase 
<page>567</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=587</url>
of 0.50 per cent. over the rate (64.80) for the ! previous year. The expenditure per cent. of revenue for the last five years has been as follows :- 1896-1897 61.35 1899-1900 64.80 .. 1897-1898 65.30 62.30 1900-1901 . . .. 1898-1899 63.26 .. It will be observed that the ratio of expenses to earnings has steadily increased during the years indicated. The percentage of expenditure to revenue received is as follows :- Traffic . . .. Locomotive .. Car and wagon repairs . . Maintenance of way . Head Office Management . . i Departmental .. Less credit recoveries Net increase .. . The train-miles run for 1900-1901 were 1899-1900 Increase This increased train-mileage represents ad- ditional facilities afforded the public, and the mileage run by extra trains to overtake the in-  creased goods traffic. In this connection I would specially empha- size the fact that, notwithstanding that every effort has been made to cope with the growing traffic on the railways by the turning-out and importation of further rolling-stock, it is only with the greatest difficulty that the trade of the colony has been carried on. The engine-power and rolling-stock has been utilised to its utmost capacity, and the great amount of traffic has necessitated the running of an inordinate num- ber of special trains, and the payment of large sums for overtime over the whole of the railway sections of the colony. Until the rolling-stock is brought up to a reasonable condition this unsatisfactory method will to some extent con. tinue. The working-expenses for locomotive-power have decreased slightly, being £293,383, as against £295,542 for last year, and the locomo- tive charges per train mile have decreased 1.69d. Car and wagon repairs have increased from £76,555 in 1899-1900 to £91,532 for last year, an increase of £14,977, and the cost per train- mile has increased 0.36d. during the same period. The expenditure for maintenance of the line, buildings, bridges, and other structures, still continues to increase, the amount expended under this head for the year under review being £426,405, as against £394,619 for the previous The amounts chargeable to expenditure, Working Account, are as follow :- 1899-1900. 1900 1901. In the Traffic Branch £262,552 $296,159 .. Locomotive Branch 384,915 372,097 Maintenance Branch 394,619 426,405 Management 51,590 47,717 .. £1,159,069 £1,076,985 Less credit recoveries 24,627 31,221 . . £1,127,848 £1,052,358 Decrease. Increase. 1900-1901. 1899-1900. 0.98 17.15 16.17 . . 1.22 16.98 18-20 . . 4.71 0.59 5.30 . . 0.39 24.30 24.69 .. 0.95 0.05 1.0 . . 0.01 1.99 1.98 2.02 66.31 1.22 67.11 0.30 1.81 1.51 . . 1.72 65.30 64.80 1.22 0.50 . . . . .. 4,620,971 .. . . .. 4,187,893 . . .. . . 433,078 year, an increase of £31,786. The increased expenditure has been incurred on Kawakawa Section, £383; Whangarei, £164; Auckland, £3,185 ; Wellington - Napier-New Plymouth, £4,348; Hurunui-Bluff, £12,340; Westland, £9,056 ; Westport, £2,423 ; Nelson, $493. Kaihu and Picton Sections decreased £103 and £505 respectively. This increased expendi- ture, to which reference has been made on several occasions during the past five years, is attributable to the increasing age of the lines, the demands of the traffic for the employment of heavier and more powerful locomotives to haul greater loads at high speeds, thus necessi- tating the provision of heavier rails and stronger structures. The higher rate of wages paid and increased cost of materials have also very largely influenced the cost of maintaining the lines, as will be seen by the following figures :- Material. Labour. Cost per mile of line open 105.88 57.34 for traffic, 1899 Cost per mile of line open 109.64 74.65 for traffic, 1900 Cost per mile of line open 76.06 113.52 for traffic, 1901 .. The cost of bridge repairs and renewals dur- ing the year was $54,020, of which #10,620 was debited to capital, and the balance, £43,400, to working-expenses. The cost of maintenance per mile of railway open for traffic for the year ending the 31st March, 1901, was #196.14, against $187.99 for the preceding year. Included in the working-  
<page>568</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=588</url>
of $7,834 for additions and improvements to the lines and structures, which would have been a fair charge against capital. Head Office expenditure for the year was £1,707, and departmental offices £2,165, greater than in the preceding year, but the ratio of expenses to revenue in regard to these two offices was approximately the same as for the previous year. The increased expenditure under these two heads was to be expected in view of the heavy and continued increase of traffic. # 4\. EXPENDITURE FOR ADDITIONS TO OPEN LINES. £325,032 has been expended under this head and charged to Capital Account in respect of additions to rolling-stock, and improvements to station-buildings and accommodation, per- manent-way, and structures. Of this amount £108,037 has been expended on improvements to sidings, station-buildings, water-services, safety and interlocking appliances, signals, stock-yards, strengthening bridges, respacing sleepers, provision of additional telephone and telegraph facilities, relaying line, and improving wharves. £216,995 has been expended on the provision of new rolling-stock and the conver- sion of obsolete types of engines and carriages into up-to-date stock; also for provision of turn- tables, fitting stock on Wellington-Napier-New Plymouth Section with Westinghouse brake, providing cushions for second-class cars, fitting additional cars with Pintsch gas, lighting Petone Workshops by electricity, and providing addi-  tional machinery for workshops. The rolling- stock in respect of which the charges are made consist of 4 locomotives, 29 carriages, 22 brake- vans, 56 bogie wagons, 376 four-wheel wagons, and 600 tarpaulins, all completed on the 31st #cc-zero March last ; and 17 locomotives, 151 carriages, 27 brake-vans, 48 bogie wagons, 1,002 four- wheel wagons, and 800 tarpaulins incomplete, but in hand on that date. The following figures show the additions to rolling-stock since 31st March, 1895 : 36 loco- motives, 105 carriages, 37 brake-vans, 2,363 wagons, and 2,644 tarpaulins. # 5\. MIDLAND RAILWAY. The revenue from the Midland Railway from the 1st April to the 21st July, 1900, the date up to which the line was in trust, was £7,096, and the expenditure £6,573, leaving a credit balance of £523. The sum of £1,263 was paid for additional rolling-stock and signals. On the 23rd July, 1900, the whole of the Midland Railways-comprising the lines from Brunner to Jackson, 31 miles 34 chains ; Still- water to Reefton, 37 miles 13 chains ; Belgrove to Motupiko, 9 miles 44 chains ; and Springfield to Otarama, 4 miles 57 chains-were formally taken possession of by the Government and incorporated with the State railways of the colony. The Midland Company's rates and charges. which had been in operation on such of the lines as were open for traffic, were there- upon abolished, and the whole of the charges the Government lines from or to stations on the Midland lines were very materially reduced, one through charge at Government rates only being made, instead of the two separate charges levied under the old system. The principal portion of the traffic between stations on the Midland Railway and Government lines was conveyed between stations on the Hokitika- Brunner system of Government railways and the Jackson-Reefton-Brunner portion of the Midland lines, and the users of these lines are therefore now receiving very substantial con- cessions in the matter of rates as a consequence of the acquisition of the Midland lines by the Government. The receipts from the lines formerly belong- ing to the Midland Railway Company for the period 22nd July, 1900, to the 31st March, 1901, have been merged into and are included in the earnings of the Government lines for the year. In this connection the question, what effect has the inclusion of such receipts had on the net result of the year's working of the Govern- ment lines, seeing that no addition to the capital cost was made in respect to the Midland Railways, will probably arise. For answer, 1 would point out that during the time the Mid- land Railway was worked by the Government as a trust the net revenue per annum, with a higher scale of charges than is now in opera- tion, barely exceeded £5,000 in any one year. The conditions of working have varied very little. Up to the present the traffic has not increased to any appreciable extent, while the freight charges have been very materially reduced ; and it may therefore be assumed that the net result of the working of the Mid- land Railways for the nine months they have been in the hands of the Government would not add more than £4,000 to the revenue of the Government railways. This amount is so small as to have no appreciable effect on the interest earned on the capital cost of our lines (£17,207,328). I direct special attention to this matter in order to dispel any feeling that the inclusion of the earnings of the Midland lines have inflated the net revenue of the Government lines, and largely affected the result of the year's working. 6\. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FORECAST. The value of freight concessions made by the Government since resumption of control of the railways in the colony in 1895 is estimated to be approximately £420,239 up to 31st March, 1901. The concessions previously granted have embraced passenger and season-ticket rates, workers' suburban tickets, holiday and school excursion fares, rates for live-stock, chaff, lime, butter, cheese, lime for manuring farm lands, agricultural produce, empty butter and fish packages, manures, bricks, clay, coal, scrap- iron, racehorses, hunters, polo ponies, and hounds, abolition of extra charge for goods con- veyed on certain branch lines, and lower rates for conveyance over port lines of goods from centres to ports. The concessions have included many 
<page>569</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=589</url>
articles of every-day use by all classes of the community. The regulations have been drawn up and are interpreted on a more liberal basis than heretofore ; and the results of the year's working show conclusively that the people of the colony recognise and appreciate the efforts that have been made to induce traffic and to popularise and make the railways the principal and indispensable medium of intercommuni- cation between the various portions of the colony. In continuation, therefore, of the policy enunciated in 1896-viz., that a 3-per- cent. return having been secured from the railways reductions should be made in freights on New Zealand products-the Go- vernment has determined to make further concessions. These will embrace reduction of passenger-fares on Kaibu Section, rates for small lots of dairy produce, butter, poultry, eggs, bacon, cheese, manures, and wool, the abolition of the charge as for an additional five miles on all traffic passing over the Rimutaka Incline, and continuation of free carriage of lime for manuring farm lands. The value of the proposed concessions is estimated to be £30,000. It is considered that the time has now arrived when a daily mail-train service should be inaugurated between Wellington and New Ply- mouth, and, with this end in view, I have given instructions that, commencing on the Ist November, mail trains shall run daily between Wanganui and New Plymouth, thus securing a through daily connection between Wellington and New Plymouth ; the speeds of the mail trains will at the same time be accele- rated, so as to very materially shorten the journey-time between the stations named. The railway traffic has increased so rapidly and enormously during the last six years that it has in many places practically outgrown the carrying-capacity of our lines, which were   originally intended as the pioneers of settle- ment, and were not built to successfully cope with a business such as now exists in many parts of the colony. There is every indication that the business of the railways will still con- tinue to increase very largely, and it is, there- fore, imperatively necessary that steps be at once taken to make provision for dealing with the trade of the colony in an efficient manner. This can only be successfully and economically accomplished by equipping the lines with the latest safety-appliances, and practically recon- structing, and in some cases duplicating, the lines. A considerable portion of the rails in different parts of the colony require replacing with heavier metals, to admit of the use of engines of the most powerful type. In my last year's Statement I indicated the lines that would first require to be duplicated, and also the amount of funds necessary to enable the work of improving and strengthening the lines and structures being undertaken and carried out in a comprehensive and satisfactory man- ner, and I would again urge that serious con- sideration be given to the question of providing funds for the works indicated, which are matters of vital importance to the colony and its rail- ways. VOL. CXVIII .- 37. Notwithstanding the fact that the workshops are kept busily engaged in building rolling- stock, and that a very large number of opera- tives are employed at the work, the capacity of our workshops is not equal to the requirements of the business of the railways, and it has become abundantly evident that the workshops must be considerably enlarged in order that the building of rolling-stock may be retained in the colony, and the stock itself be turned out with greater expedition. The fact that the New Zealand railways are composed of so many small and isolated sections renders their success- ful management a matter of some difficulty, and adds very materially to the working- expenses, and thereby affects the result of the working of the railways as a whole. It is therefore very desirable, in the interests of the colony, that where possible these small sections should be joined up and made into con- tinuous lines. The Kawakawa, Whangarei, Picton, and Nelson Sections are cases in point. Each of these sections has its own resident officer in charge, and in addition special officers are required to make frequent visits at very considerable cost. The possible distance traffic can be carried on such sections is also so very short that high rates must of necessity be charged, and even then some of the lines cannot be made to pay more than bare working-ex- penses with the exercise of the most rigid economy. The increase in the cost of railway materials and of labour has had a very considerable effect upon the working-expenses for the past year, the increased expenditure under this head for the Maintenance Branch alone being £20,048 over last year. I am frequently urged to confine the im- portation of Australian hardwood sleepers to the narrowest limits, and, in some instances, to altogether discontinue the importation of such sleepers, in order that a larger number of New- Zealand-grown sleepers may be used ; and at the same time I am urged to relax the conditions under which New Zealand sleepers are accepted with a view to the acceptance of numbers of such sleepers which are now condemned by the Inspectors appointed for the purpose. I may say in regard to this matter, that the heavy engines now running in various parts of the colony, some of them weighing up to 64 tons, make it absolutely necessary that only the very strongest timber obtainable should be used for sleepers, as the stability of the line, the safety of the trains, and the lives of passengers carried daily are very largely dependent on the strength of the sleepers used in the track. While the Government is most anxious to obtain a regular supply of sleepers of suitable New Zealand timber, it is at the same time absolutely neces- sary that a proper margin of safety should exist in our lines, and this can only be ob- tained by the use of the very best class of material available. It is, moreover, an in- controvertible fact that, notwithstanding the efforts of the Government to obtain, and its willingness to pay an enhanced price for. a regular supply of suitable New Zealand 
<page>570</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=590</url>
the quality of the sleepers has deteriorated to | such an extent that rigid inspection has had to be insisted on in the interests of public safety, and the inferior quality of the sleepers now offered is evidenced by the large number re- jected by the Inspectors appointed to examine them. New-Zealand-grown sleepers are em- ployed in every instance where they can be ob- tained and used without imperilling the safety of the line ; and, in order to increase the life of the sleeper, the department has recently ob- tained two creosote plants for treating the sleepers prior to their being laid in the track. The visit to this colony of contingents of the Imperial and Indian troops led to a very large passenger traffic to the various centres visited by the troops ; it also necessitated the convey- ance of the troops from one end of the colony to the other by train on very short notice, and made very great demands on the railway staff. The difficulties were accentuated by the shortage of rolling-stock suitable for carrying passengers. I am, however, pleased to be able to place on record the fact that the whole of the arrange- ments were carried out in an entirely satis- factory manner, and reflected the greatest credit on the whole of the railway staff of the colony. In view of the reductions contemplated in fares and freights, I estimate the revenue for the year ending 31st March, 1902, at £1,760,000 and the expenditure at £1,152,000. The usual reports and returns are attached hereto. # MINES STATEMENT. [ For the Returns and Tables referred to in this State- ment, see Appendix C .- 2.]  The following is the Mines Statement, laid upon the table by the Minister of Mines (Mr. McGOWAN) on the 5th September, 1901 :- Year ending 31st December, 1900. Product. Quantity. Gold 373,616 oz. . . : 326,457 Silver .. .. Copper-ore 12 tons .. .. Antimony 3 Manganese-ore 166 Mixed mineral 2,126 Chrome-ore .. 28 Colonial coal exported, includ- 112,707 by Home ing that used steamers Coke exported Colonial coal consumed in New 981,283 Zealand Kauri-gum .. 10,159 .. . . Total value of production for 1900 Total value of production for 1899 Total increase mit my annual Statement to Parliament. In doing so it gives me much pleasure to re- mark on the continued and growing import- ance of the mining industry, which, taken as a whole, and judged from a productive standpoint, may be said to be generally satisfactory, and no small factor in the advancement of the colony. From causes which will be referred to further on, it will be seen that the output of gold and silver for the year 1900 was rather less than that of the preceding year, but as against this there was a decided increase in the production of other minerals ; and, notwithstanding the decrease in the output of precious metals for the time being, the actual value of the mineral production for 1900 was in excess of that of the year 1899. The several branches of mining will be referred to under their respective headings. # MINERAL PRODUCTION. The annexed Table No. 1 shows the quantity of gold, silver, coal, and other minerals, includ- ing kauri-gum, produced during the year ending 31st December, 1900. The total production of gold and silver was 700,073 oz., valued at £1,478,481, and shows a decrease in value of $75,530 as compared with the unusually large production of the preceding year. The output of other minerals, including coal and lignite, has been 1,106,484 tons, represent- ing a value of £1,224,666, or 118,672 tons, value £122,123, in excess of the previous year. Kauri- gum to the amount of 10,159 tons, valued at £622,293, was obtained. Compared with the production of the previous year this shows a" decrease of 957 tons, but an increased value of £14,374. The quantities and values of the chief mineral productions for the past two years are summarised for comparison as follow :- Year ending 31st December, 1800. Value. Quantity. Value. £ 1,439,602 389,558 oz. 1,513,173 38,879 349,338 . 40,838 45 .. .. 101 . . 588 135 tons 407 12,751 1,309 6,591 . 110 . . 83,065 98,136 89,480 18 9 885,754 490,642 404,532 622,293 11,116 607,919 . 2,703,147 £2,656,554 2,656,554 £46,593 
<page>571</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=591</url>
The total value of gold, silver, coal, and other minerals, including kauri-gum, produced up to end of 1900 was $76,104,981. As the value of gold and silver produced in 1891 was $440,213 in excess of that of 1898, it will be seen that the decreased production for 1000 (representing a value of $75,530) is not serious, and is accounted for by the cessation of operations at a few quartz mines, and tempo- rary suspension-due to development-work and alterations to plant, &c .- at others ; also to the ! of #99,787 (gold, £94,389 ; silver, £5,399). conditions (due principally to the recent dredg- Comparative Statement of Gold and Silver entered for Export during the First Half of the Years 1900 and 1901. Half-year ending 30th June, 1900. - Value. Amount. Oz .. Gold 179,303 694,859 . . Silver 15,907 144,782 .. The amended regulations made under " The Mining Act, 1898," now make provision for the gold returns being furnished to the department up to the 31st day of December in each year, and it is intended that in the future the Table (No. 2) shall show the export quantities and values for the calendar year instead of the financial year. This year the table has been compiled as hitherto, but an additional table (No. 3) shows the exports of gold for the nine  months ending the 31st December, 1900. # GOLD EXPORT. The quantity of gold entered for exportation through the Customs for the past financial year was 392,976 oz., valued at £1,516,482, the respective districts contributing as follows : Auckland, 166,049 oz. ; Marlborough, 247 oz. ; Nelson, 5,126 oz. ; West Coast, 85,779 oz. ; Canterbury, 22 oz. ; Otago and Southland, 135,753 oz. # GOLD-MINING. Quartz. This method of gold-mining is the only form carried on in the North Island, all gold of a payable character-so far as is yet known- being associated with quartz in situ. During the year a considerable amount of development- work has been done at several of the principal mines in the Upper Thames district, and it is confidently expected that, as a result of the liberal and apparently judicious manner in which capital has been expended, the returns from this portion of the goldfield will show a decided advance within the next year or two. There is an aspect of permanence in the works undertaken at Waihi, Waitekauri, and Kara- ngahake, which augurs well for the future of these places; and on the completion of the branch railway now being constructed from Pacroa to Waihi the mining industry will be ing boom) which prevailed during the year in regard to alluvial mining. The latest returns from the Customs (as set out in the following table of comparisons) go to show that the yield of precious metals is again ! increasing, the export value of gold and silver for the first six months of the present year being --- largely in excess not only of the corresponding period of last year, but actually of that of the first six months of the year 1899 to the extent Half-year ending 30th Increase for First Half of June, 1901. 1901. Amount. Amount. Value. Value. Oz. Oz. 3 4 217,478 38,775 844,888 150,029 226,267 81,485 24,725 8,818 materially benefited, and especially so in regard to the supply of fuel for the requirements of the mines. At the Lower Thames there is, unfortunately, nothing to report in the direction of the actual development of the deeper levels. Owing to financial reasons the sinking of the Thames- Hauraki shaft was suspended at the latter end of last year, and so far no satisfactory under. standing has been arrived at with a view to its being further deepened. It is most desirable, in the interests of the industry and of the dis- trict, that the existence or otherwise of payable reefs below what is regarded as an unproductive belt should be definitely proved. With the object of ascertaining the potentialities of the hitherto unproved ground below the foreshore and estuary, the Victoria Gold-mining Com- pany are now engaged in boring operations, and, in view of the importance of this work, assistance is being given to the company by the Government by the loan of its diamond boring plant and a subsidy of $1,000, at the rate of 10s. for every #1 sterling expended by the com- pany in these pioneer explorations. Operations at some mines at and near Coro- mandel have been suspended ; but development- works are in progress at the Hauraki Freeholds Mine, the Royal Oak of Hauraki, and the Kauri Freehold Gold Estates Company's mines at Opitonui. An amalgamation of the Mariposa and Kapai-Vermont Mines at Kuaotunu has been effected and operations resumed. The reefs at Gumtown (Mercury Bay), which were discovered a couple of years ago, look promis- ing, and the mine on Great Barrier Island has now reached the productive stage. In Marlborough quartz-mining on a small scale has been commenced at Top Valley Creek, and the indications met with there appear such as to offer inducement for further prospecting in the mountain-range 
<page>572</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=592</url>
Reefton may be looked upon as likely to be a steady producer of gold from quartz-mining operations for some years to come. Much capital and labour have been expended in de- veloping several properties in a systematic manner and in the erection of modern battery and cyanide extraction plants to deal with the ore. Quartz-mining in the Southern District has not shown any tendency to advance. In two instances-namely, the O.P.Q. Mines at Wai- pori and the Shotover Mine near Skipper's Point -active developments have been conspicuous ; but, generally speaking, quartz-mining appears to be at present declining in this part of the colony. After the expenditure of large sums of money during the last few years, operations have, unfortunately, been suspended at the Achilles Mine, Bullendale, and it is also to be regretted that no active steps have been taken to develop the mine of the Cromwell Proprie- tary (Limited) at deeper levels than have hitherto been worked. No doubt the attrac- tions of the dredging industry as a field for speculation have militated against much atten- tion being paid to reefing during the past few years ; but it is only reasonable to suppose that, if the reefs in parts of this goldfield were to be developed on comprehensive and scientific lines, similar results to those obtained in the Reefton district might be obtained. Alluvial and Hydraulic Mining. This branch of mining- work has not been developed to any appreciable extent of late, owing to the attention which has been de- voted to dredging. It is quite safe to say that in several instances hydraulic mining has been neglected in favour of dredging, and this, too, at places where the former method is better suited to local conditions. In the Marlborough portion of the West Coast Inspection District there are no claims worked on an extensive scale, the largest being those of the King Solomon Mine at Mahaki- pawa (where an alluvial gutter is worked by underground mining) and the Gorge and Yukon Claims at Wakamarina. The locality of Golden Bay affords employ- ment to quite a number of alluvial miners, the principal undertakings being those of the Para- para Hydraulic Sluicing Company and the Col- lingwood Goldfields (Limited). The develop- ment-works of the latter company (costing some £15,000) have extended over a period of about four years, active sluicing operations being com- menced in November last. It is understood that hydraulic mining is about to be adopted at the Bubu River, near Takaka. In the district around Westport a consider- able number of persons are employed in the working of alluvial deposits, but beyond the resumption of operations by a local syndicate at the claim formerly held by the General Exploration Company at Fairdown, and the practical completion of the preliminary works of the Virgin Flat Gold - mining Company (Limited), no developments of importance have operations in the Grey Valley, also at Barry- town, Kumara, and in the locality of Hokitika, continue to afford employment to a large num- ber of persons ; upwards of fifty men are also employed at and in the vicinity of Ross. The Southern Goldfield-which includes the Otago, Southland, and Fiord districts - is almost entirely dependent for its gold output on the operations of alluvial and hydraulic mining in conjunction with dredging ; and, al- though new installations of hydraulic plant of any magnitude have been few in number during the past year, the industry has been very steadily carried on at the various centres, and fairly good returns obtained. This form of mining appears in every way likely to support a con- siderable percentage of the population for many years to come. As the shallow diggings on the West Coast and Southern goldfields are becoming ex- hausted, it is found that the number of Chinese diggers is gradually decreasing. ## Dredge Mining. During the past year a large number of dredges have been under construction both in the West Coast and Southern Districts. Of these, several have got to work ; others are not yet completed. The numbers on the 31st March last were as follow: Working, 145 ; standing, 11 ; undergoing removal, 4 ; building, 122 : total, 282. In the South the practicability of dredge mining has been amply proved, but the work- ing of river-beds and flats on the West Coast by dredges is not yet so fully developed, owing to difficulties of an engineering character. No doubt these difficulties will be got over as further experience is gained, and when this has been accomplished there appears every reason to believe that dredging on the West Coast will become a steady industry. Even with the dredges now at work, evidences have not been wanting to show that gold exists in payable quantities in several parts of the West Coast district where other methods of working are, under existing conditions, largely out of the question. It is quite apparent that where the gold is fine, there is ample room for improvement in the methods adopted on dredges for saving the gold, and this applies specially to the beach deposits. During the last two or three years there has been a decided tendency to increase the lifting-capacity of dredges, but it is possible this may be overdone, inasmuch as the improve- ments in, or extensions to, appliances for saving the gold have not kept pace with the increased capabilities for the raising of the gravels. It is to be regretted, also, that old and somewhat obsolete river dredges have in some instances been adopted for dredging on flats where the conditions are very different from river-dredg- ing. Such unsuitable machines cannot be ex- pected to be unqualified successes ; and the opinion that dredges ought to be designed to efficiently work their ground, and to save the 
<page>573</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=593</url>
gold which the ground contains, cannot be too strongly emphasized. The wild excitement and rash speculation which characterized this branch of mining from one to two years ago has, happily, been checked. Liquidations of companies floated during the boom are steadily in progress, and, when the worthless claims which were foisted on an excited and easily gullible public have been weeded out, the industry is in every way likely to settle down again to a steady, legiti- mate, and profitable branch of mining opera- tions. During the early part of this year the output of working river dredges was seriously curtailed in consequence of the phenomenally high state of the rivers both in the West Coast and Southern Districts. The question of working the auriferous black- sand deposits is one to which attention is being directed, and, as the successful extraction of the gold is a matter of very great importance to the mining industry, it has been decided by the Government to offer a bonus of #2,000 for the introduction of a machine or appliance which will satisfactorily treat these sands on a large scale. THE CYANIDE PROCESS OF GOLD-EXTRACTION. Since the patent rights were acquired four years ago the amount of royalty paid to the Government has amounted to £4,253, or, say, 42} per cent. of the initial cost incurred. By recent legislation the term to which the patent rights remain in force in New Zealand has been extended until such time as the revenue derived in royalties has equalled the expendi- ture which was necessary to make the cyanide process available to the gold-mining industry in this colony. # PROSPECTING. During the year ended 31st March, 1901, the sum of #1,266 11s. 7d. was expended in sub- sidies to parties of miners and prospecting associations actually engaged in prospecting for minerals. WATERCOURSES FOR TAILINGS, ETC. In consequence of the applications for the proclamation of several rivers and streams in the Middle Island as watercourses into which waste water, &c., from mining operations may be discharged, His Excellency the Governor appointed Commissioners to inquire into the question. Their reports have been received, and Proclamations issued in respect to six rivers and streams in the Middle Island, and the sum of £5,800 has been paid as compensation. The question of the proclamation of other rivers and streams reported on by the Commissioners is under consideration. # SCHOOLS OF MINES. The Schools of Mines at Coromandel, Thames, Waihi, Reefton, and that at Dunedin in con- nection with the University of Otago have been carried on steadily throughout the year, and the number of students has been well maintained. At Nelson instruction is given to senior boys in analysis and assaying. A School of Mines was opened in February last at Karangahake, to meet the needs of the increasing mining popu- lation. Including grants to the school attached to the Otago University, the total expenditure on Schools of Mines in the colony has been £31,493 3s. 7d., and extends over a period of sixteen years. # COAL-MINING. For the first time in the history of the colony the year's output of coal and lignite exceeds a million tons. The gross output for twelve months ending 31st December last was 1,093,990 tons, made up as follows : Bitu- minous and semi-bituminous coal, 673,862 tons ; pitch coal, 37,804 tons; brown coal, 339,786 tons ; and lignite, 42,538 tons. Com- pared with the gross output for 1899, the pro- duction for last year showed an increase of 118,756 tons. Of this increase, the West Coast District contributed 72,236 tons, the Southern District 27,345 tons, and the Northern District 19,175 tons. In the North Island the Taupiri Mines are the chief producers, the output being 77,191 tons, the Hikurangi Coal-mine coming second with an output of 38,572 tons ; Ngunguru Coal- mine produced 14,502 tons, and the Kiripaka Mine and Hikurangi Colliery 11,276 tons and 11,119 tons respectively. A few other small mines have been at work, principally for local requirements. Some attention is being directed towards the Mokau Coalfield, and it is probable that such may be more extensively opened up in the near future. The same remark also applies to the Collingwood Coalfield in the Middle Island. The west coast of the Middle Island con- tinues to be the chief coal-producing district, the output of the Westport Coal Company's mines alone amounting to 369,486 tons, or rather more than one-third of the entire output of the colony. The Brunner Mines produced 125,403 tons, and the Blackball Mine 82,516 tons, but the output of the latter was somewhat curtailed owing to the mine being closed down for a time in consequence of a fire in the work- ings, which was discovered at an early stage and suppressed. The old Mokihinui Mine (which was let to a party of working miners) yielded 10,092 tons from the Big Face section, but recent operations cannot be considered as representing a permanent output from this property unless further discoveries of coal are made. In the Southern Inspection District there are a number of small mines scattered throughout Canterbury, North Otago, Central Otago, and Southland, which are purely of local import- ance, but supply the general requirements of the various localities. Their production con- sists of brown coal and lignite, no anhydrous coals of a marketable character being yet dis- covered, with the exception of some anthracite coal in Canterbury, which is too remote from existing railway-lines to become as yet a com- mercial article. In Central Otago numerous 
<page>574</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=594</url>
made. These have all received the careful attention of the department, and it has been found that in many instances these applications have been made for purely speculative purposes, and not with any bona fide intention of the applicants actually working the coal them- selves. Where it has been satisfactorily shown that additional leases or licenses were actually required grants have been made, and, speaking generally, the areas now held under license or lease are ample for the requirements of the district for some time to come. The principal collieries north of Dunedin are near Shag Point. The Shag Point Mine has worked for thirty- seven years for a total production of 386,859 tons, the output for last year being 21,209 tons. The Allandale Colliery (adjoining) had an output of 16,595 tons for the year. At the Kaitangata Collieries (which are the principal mines in the South) the output was 112,455 tons for the year, and Nightcaps Colliery (Southland) had an output of 27,840 tons. Including some mines on private lands, and worked solely for the requirements of the owners, the number of mines worked during the year is 167, giving employment to 2,460 persons. In consequence of a recommendation from the Goldfields and Mines Committee, a Royal Commission was appointed by His Excellency the Governor to inquire into the various matters connected with the coal-mining indus- try, and the report of the Commission has already been submitted to Parliament. # ACCIDENTS IN MINES. The following statement shows the number of fatal accidents which have occurred for the  period covered by the reports of the Inspectors of Mines :- Accidents. employed. Persons Number Rate Fatal of Class of Mining. 4,267 Quartz-mines 0.93 4 Alluvial and hydraulic mines 9,235 8\* 0.86 and dredges Coal-mines .. 2,460 1.62 4 .. 15,962 1.00 16 \*Includes one fatality in connection with dredging Investigation of these fatal accidents showed that in one instance, where the manager was killed along with two of his mon, reasonable precautions had not been observed. In the case of the dredge employé who was drowned, it was found that the regulations made for the safety of persons employed had been disre- garded. A prosecution for breach of regula- tions followed, but the charge was dismissed on technical grounds. The decreased percentage of fatalities in pro- portion to the number of persons employed, and especially in relation to dredging, is a very pleasing and satisfactory feature. The output of sulphur exported during 1900 was 1,692 tons, this being an increase of 465 tons as compared with the production of the previous year. # KAURI-GUM. For the year 1900 the quantity exported was 10,159 tons, valued at $622,293. Although the tonnage was less than that of the previous year by 957 tons, the smaller production re- presents an increase in value of £14,374. The industry continues to afford employment to a considerable number of Natives and Europeans. # SCHEELITE. Messrs. Donaldson Brothers, of Macrae's (Otago), continue to separate scheelite from the quartz, and as yet are the only people in the colony who prepare this ore as a marketable product. Other parties in the district are re- ported to have given some attention to the sub- ject, but nothing of importance has so far been done by them to place scheelite on the market. # HEMATITE PAINT. This is still being produced at the Thames by the New Zealand Paint-manufacturing Com- pany, and at Parapara by Messrs. Washbourne Brothers. The latter firm also manufacture knife-polish from a felspathic rock found in the locality. # CINNABAR. The prospecting which has been carried on between Waitahuna and Waipori (Otago) is said to have been very satisfactory, the discovery of a lode of considerable extent being reported. Some other prospecting has also been under- taken in the Thames district at Kauaeranga Valley. per 1,000. # ANTIMONY. A lode is being exploited at Alexandra South, but can hardly be said to have yet reached a commercial stage. ## CHROME-ORE. Some work is being done on the deposit near Croixelles Harbour. The shipment last year amounted to 28 tons. # COPPER-ORE. The attention of prospectors is being directed to the lodes at Moke Creek, Lake Wakatipu. ## SHALE-OIL. At Orepuki a mine has been opened out for the supply of shale, and extensive works erected to treat the mineral for the extraction of oils, paraffin-wax, ammonia, &c. The manufacture of oil and other products was commenced in the carly part of this year, and it is understood that the productions of the works are being readily sought after. This is a new industry so far as New Zealand is concerned, and it is to be hoped that the venture, upon which a large capital has been expended, will be eminently successful. 
<page>575</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=595</url>
ROADS AND TRACKS. As compared with the previous year, the ex- penditure on roads and tracks shows a decrease of £5,797 15s. 8d. The amount paid as sub- sidies to local bodies was £3,264 13s. 1d., and the sum of £45,152 14s. 2d. has been expended in direct grants on roads and tracks for the de- velopment of mining districts. The total sums for the past nineteen years are £373,904 18s. 2d. and £98,446 14s. 2d. respectively. # GEOLOGICAL EXPLORATIONS. Examinations have been made in several parts of the colony with a view to the de- termination of the character and extent of mineral country hitherto unworked, and natu- rally the coal-bearing areas have received a fair share of attention. The Government Geologist (Mr. Mckay) is of opinion that the coal areas at Pakawau and Puponga, in the Collingwood district, are likely to prove satisfactory. The question of the probability of a payable coal-field at Waimangaroa has been under in- vestigation. The measures here lie at a very steep angle, and it is estimated that to reach the coal at a site convenient to the railway at Waimangaroa Station, shafts not less than 1,500 ft. deep would be required, but coal may be reached at a more moderate depth near the mouth of Ngakawau River. In regard to the alleged possibilities of an important coalfield further west than that already exploited by the mines in the Grey Valley, Mr. Mckay is not over-sanguine, but he recommended that proof should be obtained by boring. Accordingly the Greymouth Har- bour Board, with assistance from the Govern- ment, put down a bore at a site selected by that Board to a depth of about 350 ft. without reaching coal, and the bore has been discon- tinued. Mr. Mckay further expresses the opinion that prospecting for coal in the Kaiata Ranges cannot lead to any satisfactory results. Examinations were made of the coal deposits in the localities of Kokotahi and Ross. At these places the measures show signs of dis- turbance, the coal-seams are thin, somewhat crushed, and very highly inclined. From these features the probable value of the coal deposits appears to be inconsiderable. In the neighbourhood of Deep Creek, Kotuku, in the Grey Valley, indications of the existence of petroleum are such as to warrant vigorous prospecting. Petroleum has also been found in the Poverty Bay district, but further investi- gation of an operative character is required before any definite opinion can be formed as to the possibilities of this being in sufficient quantity for producing commercially. In respect to copper-ore, examinations made in the localities of Maharahara, near Wood- ville (Hawke's Bay), and in the Ruahine Range, west of Norsewood, go to show that, although the ore exists to some extent, nothing of a commercial character has so far been dis- covered. Examinations have also been made in the Kaimanawa, Kaweka, Rimutaka, and Ruahine Ranges, but no minerals were met with in sufficient quantity to pay for working. # THE MINING BUREAU. The publication of the New Zealand Mines Record, which was commenced in August, 1897, by the Mining Bureau has been con- tinued monthly since that date. Information relating to improved mining processes and machinery is compiled from various sources for the benefit of those engaged in the industry in this colony ; while the statistics and infor- mation obtained by the department from its officers must tend to afford guidance to in- vestors both inside and outside the colony. Some of the special articles which appear in the Record are printed as leaflets and judi- ciously distributed. # CONCLUSION. Generally speaking, it may be said that the mining industry is in a satisfactory condition, and, although the output of precious metals was lower for the year 1900 than was the case in the previous year, the output of other minerals more than balanced the value, and showed an advance of £46,593 on the value of the mineral production for 1899. The causes for the de- creased yield of gold and silver have already been referred to, as also has the increased returns for the first half of the year 1901. There is every indication that the mineral production of this year will show an increase over that of the year 1900. The experience of previous gambling in mining shares has been repeated in the late dredging boom, and the reaction which has set in will, I think, tend to the consolidation of a really good and profitable branch of the gold- mining industry. # SUPPLY. CLASS I .- LEGISLATIVE. House of Representatives, £4,065. 7.30. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) said the first item showing an increase was for the Second Clerk - Assistant -an increase of £25. He had nothing to say against this officer, who was thoroughly reliable and did his work satisfactorily ; but, seeing that this was the first item with an increase over £300, he desired information upon it, and to learn what increases had been received by the officer during the last three years. Mr. SEDDON (Colonial Treasurer) wished to know if answering a question was to be counted a speech. If so, that might be the means of stopping debate, because if he answered ques- tions he could not speak in reply. The ACTING-CHAIRMAN (Major Steward) said that no provision had been made for this in the Standing Orders. Mr. SEDDON wished to know if he replied to a question was that to be taken as a speech. Hon. MEMBERS .- No, no. Mr. SEDDON said, In that case he could reply to questions. Mr. Lowe had not previously bad an increase, and this increase was made upon the recommendation of Mr. Speaker. The Reader and Clerk of Bills and Papers had not previously had an increase, having been ap- 
<page>576</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=596</url>
recommended a larger increase than that pro- posed. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) noticed that there was one messenger for the House of Representa- tives at $125, and that lower down there was an item, " Extra messengers and police, £1,400." Why were these messengers specified under the heading of " Messenger " given above ? Sir J. G. WARD said, Because there was only one permanent messenger. Mr. SEDDON said, Last year the expendi- ture on this item amounted to £1,341. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) thought the position of Interpreter was unsatisfactory, con- sidering the duties he had to perform, and remarked that last year the Premier had promised to look into this matter. Mr. SEDDON replied than an increase had been given under the Native Lands Depart- ment. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) moved, That the item, "Reader and Clerk of Bills and Papers, £175," be reduced by £25. This was an increase of £25 from last year. The duties of the officer were not increased in any way ; the work was that of a clerk, and the re- sponsibilities were nil. He quoted the remarks of the Premier made last year in regard to the appointment of the officer. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) moved, as a prior amendment, That the item, "Serjeant- at-Arms, £200," be reduced by £1, as an indica- tion that the House did not approve of the appointment of another Serjeant-at-Arms. He believed if any money was wasted in the public service it was wasted immediately in connec-  tion with the Legislature, and there was an opportunity here of commencing to reduce expenditure without inflicting hardship on a single human being. No one was occupying the position at present, and, so far as he knew, it had been promised to no person. He believed a messenger could fulfill all the functions attached to the position. He moved the reduc- tion of £1 because he presumed a part of the salary had been already earned. Mr. McNAB (Mataura) thought the honour- able member for Lyttelton had made a very great mistake in supposing the duties of Serjeant-at- Arms were merely nominal. In the event of any trouble in the House, it was through the Serjeant-at-Arms that the House enforced its authority, and he thought, if such an occasion arose, the House would rebel against any power that would allow Mr. Speaker to call upon one of the messengers to ask an honourable member to retire. He might point out that the reason there had been such a number of complaints of late, as to strangers continually frequenting the lobbies and library and other parts of the build- ings, had been owing to the illness of the Ser- jeant-at-Arms and no one taking up his duties. The House ought not to reduce the salary, but see that a real live officer was appointed to the position. This was one of the most important offices of the House, and he hoped the honour- able member would withdraw his amendment. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) said he had a Mr. Seddon item, "Second Clerk-Assistant, £325," be re- duced by £25. He did this not with any desire to attack the individual, but in accord- ance with the principles he had laid down in regard to the increases on the estimates this year, and, as this was the first increase, he was only beginning what he proposed to do through- out the estimates. Mr. Lowe had occupied the position about two years, and he had received £300 a year. He did not say £300 was a high salary, but it was a fair salary, and if the colony were in a position to stand increases he should not object to this at all, because the officer was well worth the money. He certainly thought when they had an opportunity they should endeavour to keep the expenditure down as reasonably as possible. Mr. SEDDON said, Originally the salary was £450 for the same work. It was then brought down to £400, then to $350, and Mr. Lowe was appointed at $300. His intention was that that officer should have an increment until the salary reached what the House considered the maximum for this position. If the House con- sidered $300 the maximum for the position, let the House vote for the amendment. If the House thought the officer occupying the position, and who was doing his work well, should have an increase, let it vote for the salary as it stood. He (Mr. Seddon) thought the maximum ought to be $350 a year. Mr. Lowe worked all the year round, and was an excellent officer. The posi- tion was whether the salary was to be £300 or more. Mr. R. MCKENZIE (Motueka) was surprised at the attitude taken up by some members. Five years ago $300 more was paid under this head than now. If we had good men and trained them for the position they were worth the money, and £350 was not more than the position was worth. Mr. MILLAR said, Mr. Rutherford was many years in the position before he got more than $350. Mr. Lowe had only been two years in the position, and was getting a rise of $25, and next year he supposed he would get an in- crease of another £25. He thought that in the present condition of the colony we could not afford to pay these salaries. Mr. SEDDON said he had ascertained that when Mr. Rutherford was first appointed to the position he received £350 a year, and it stood at that for many years. Members must con- trast the work of seventeen years ago with the work now. It was a very important position. and whoever held it now had more to do than was the case seventeen years ago. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said he had no hesitation in voting for the item as it stood. The gentleman who occupied this most important position was an officer on whom every member of the House placed the utmost reliance. Outside the four walls of the House he was the controller of the legislative ma- chinery of that branch of the Parliament, and a more reliable, clear-headed man, he was sure. could not be found for the position. The salary proposed was not too high. 
<page>577</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=597</url>
"That the item, ' Second Clerk-Assistant, £325,' be reduced by £25." AYES, 12. Thomson, J. W. Buddo Laurenson Parata Tellers. Collins Russell, G. W. Meredith Ell Millar. Gilfedder Tanner Hornsby NOES, 41. Allen, E. G. Graham McNab Allen, J. Hall-Jones Napier Arnold Hardy Palmer Haselden Pirani Atkinson Bennet Rhodes Heke Bollard Herries Seddon Carncross Houston Symes Hutcheson Thompson, R. Carroll Colvin Kaihau Ward Wilford Duncan Lang Witheford. Field Lawry Fowlds Tellers. Massey Fraser, A. L. D. McGowan Fisher Mckenzie, R. Fraser, W. McGuire Majority against, 29. Amendment negatived. Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton), replying to the arguments of the honourable member for Mataura against his proposition to reduce the salary of the Serjeant-at-Arms, said that if the only use of such an officer was to remove obstreperous members, that duty could just as well be performed by a policeman, and that would be putting no indignity upon members who would go so far as to defy the House. He had no wish to see the salaries reduced of men holding responsible positions, but, when it came  to dealing with sinecures, then the members, having acknowledged the necessity for retrench- ment, should begin by putting their own house in order. As for strangers being allowed to wander about the precincts of the House, they might reasonably ask the chief Messenger to see that that was prevented. As far as carrying in the mace was concerned, surely one of the mes- sengers could be trained to do that ? He moved to reduce the salary by £1, as he believed that this office of Serjeant-at-Arms was an unneces- sary one. Mr. SEDDON hoped the Committee would not agree to this. There were duties which devolved upon the Serjeant-at-Arms which it would not be in keeping with the dignity of members of Parliament to have performed by a messenger. The officer, he thought, was essential, and it was necessary to have him as between mem- bers and Mr. Speaker. The position was one which had been handed down to them from the past, and there was work to be done by this officer which would have to be done by some one, and paid for, so that the saving by the abolition of the office would not be material. This officer had to control the distribution of tickets and of the vouchers for the payment of members. There was no proposal for an in- crease ; no saving would be made by doing away with the office, and if the office were abolished they would have to recast the Standing Orders. with the motion moved by the member for Lyttelton, and would vote for it ; but, as he could not help believing it would not be carried, he suggested that when a new officer was ap- pointed some definite scheme should be laid down as to his duties. There was an over- lapping of jurisdiction between the House Com- mittee and the Serjeant-at-Arms. One or other should have definite jurisdiction over the ad- mission of strangers. As it was, the Serjeant- at-Arms was only responsible to Mr. Speaker, and not to the House Committee. Mr. TANNER (Avon) said there were at least three fairly well-paid officials - Serjeant-at- Arms, £200; messenger, £185; and custodian, £300-provided for on the estimates, and no member of the House knew where their duties began or ended; indeed, some of the officers were practically unknown to the House. The payment of money by the Government must be exceedingly costly if in other departments as much was paid for the distribution of a few vouchers and cheques as was done in this. It would be well that they should appoint a Serjeant-at-Arms, now that a vacancy had occurred, who was really capable of carrying out his duties, one who was acquainted with the duties of his office, and would carry them out in a manner so as to provoke as little friction as possible. Sir J. G. WARD (Colonial Secretary) thought it might interest members to know the position of the Serjeant-at-Arms by comparison with officers holding similar positions in Victoria and New South Wales. In Victoria the Ser- jeant-at-Arms was paid a salary of $426 per annum, and in New South Wales the amount was £533. The duties of the Serjeant-at-Arms were many, and he thought it would be a mis- take to either substitute a messenger or abolish the office. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) said the dignity of the House was maintained by subscribing to old forms and ceremonies handed down by the Mother Parliament, and he would be sorry to see them abolished. If they could get some one to fulfil the duties in a proper way, he should receive a salary commensurate with the position, and certainly £200 was not enough. He hoped the Government, when they made the new appointment, would choose a man able to uphold the position and add his quota to the good government of the House. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) recognised the neces- sity for economy; but it was not going the right way about it to abolish this office. He could not support the proposed reduction. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said the excessive cost of government did not arise from excessive salaries, and he was not going to support the reduction of legitimate items, but where there were useless offices he would vote for their extinction. This office was a sinecure, and there would be no hardship in abolishing the office now. The duties appertaining to it could easily be divided amongst other officers of the House. 
<page>578</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=598</url>
which most concerned honourable members was that better order should be observed in all parts of the buildings. He agreed with the honourable member for Avon that, apart altogether from the illness of the late Serjeant-at-Arms, there had been a distinct falling-off in the management of the Parlia- mentary Buildings of late years. The lobby was to all intents and purposes a public thoroughfare, and the library was also largely encroached upon, and it seemed to be the duty of no one to rectify this state of affairs. He hoped that the Premier, in conjunction with the Speaker and the Committees of the House if need be, would do something to prevent the lobby and library being made public places. He objected to the abolition of the office of Serjeant-at- Arms, and he also hoped the salary would not be reduced. Mr. SEDDON said, If the House would give him complete charge for forty-eight hours, he would undertake to have a change made that would be satisfactory. But the fact was it appeared as if no one in particular was respon- sible, and if the Government interfered they would immediately be blamed. He thought it was the duty of the Library Committee, and the officers of the library, to ask any person in the library without authority who was misbehaving himself to retire. It seemed to him the officers were afraid to do their bounden duty. He thought, also, members of the House were largely to blame for the present state of affairs, because there was a freedom on the part of members that was never permitted in the days gone by. He considered that any  stranger who wanted to see a Minister, or to visit one of the Committees in the old library, should be made to go round outside. At pre- sent they were permitted to go through the #cc-zero lobby, which was becoming a public thorough- fare, and this should be stopped. He thought no one should be allowed inside the House, lobby, or Committee-rooms without a permit. The duty of controlling the officers of the House lay with Mr. Speaker through the Serjeant-at- Arms, and he thought each officer in charge of the various branches should see that his work was properly performed. At the present time things were not as satisfactory as he could wish them to be. He did not blame the officers, who were capable men, and when they had their duties defined he was sure they would carry them out well. Want of system was the root of the whole trouble. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL .- Who will they get the tickets from ? Mr. SEDDON said, from the Serjeant-at- Arms. They should adopt the system of the House of Commons, which was also that of New South Wales and Victoria. It was easy enough to lay down a system. He thought the Serjeant-at-Arms should be a real live man and a good disciplinarian. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) said they should have such a man for Serjeant-at-Arms as the late Colonel De Quincy-a man who was gentle- manly in manner and a respecter of the tradi- Premier speak in the manner he did. The Premier knew well what to do - give the Speaker full control. If that were done they would then know who to deal with ; but there had been divided authority, and from one cause or another the position of Serjeant-at- Arms had become demoralised. What was wanted was a gentleman who would practise The the dignity belonging to the office. gentleman who had moved this motion, how- ever, had made a mistake, for there were large increases on the estimates that wanted very careful attention, and in comparison with which the item under consideration was very trivial. Mr. BOLLARD (Eden) said the Premier was responsible for the whole of the disorgani- zation of the House. It was well known that the Premier had taken the control of all the officers out of the Speaker's hands, and the Speaker had become disgusted and had let everything go by the run. Let the Speaker get the proper authority that was due to him, and he was equal to the occasion. So far as this vote was concerned, he should vote for the vote being retained, for a Serjeant-at-Arms was a necessity. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said, before the new wing was built there were cer- tain conveniences enabling members to meet their constituents, but there were no such pro- visions now, because the Premier had entrenched himself on the very portals of Parliament, and had taken the whole suite of rooms there. Now, before a member could speak to a con- stituent with any degree of comfort he had to bring him into the lobby; and the only one room available other than the library was a dreary dungeon with acoustic properties of the very worst description. The Premier 9.0. had been heedless of the comfort and convenience of members. Members now were worse off in comfort, conveniences, and facilities for seeing their constituents than they were in the time of the old musty wooden building with which they had formerly to put up. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) said the Premier had told them if he had charge of the buildings for forty eight hours he would effect all sorts of reforms. It was only three years since the charge was taken out of his hands, and before then things were worse than they were now. The right honourable gentleman had also given as his reason for not doing away with the Serjeant-at-Arms that to do so would neces- sitate the amending of the Standing Orders. And, of course, he would only amend them when he had a new Parliament to deal with. At present there were three officers in the House whose duties overlapped : the custodian and caretaker of the buildings; the head messenger, at £185 a year; and the Serjeant- at-Arms, at £200 a year. Before any fresh appointment was made the duties of these three officers should be defined. More than that, the House Committee during the session should have the full control of these buildings and the officers in it who were not parliamentary 
<page>579</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=599</url>
officers. Last year they struck £1 off the esti- | be consistent with the dignity of the House. In regard to the other matters mentioned by mates as an instruction to the Government to honourable members, he thought it was for the bring down in detail this session the items Premier to indicate to the House the direction contained in a certain vote, but the Govern- in which improvement could be made. He ment had disregarded that instruction. Per- sonally, he saw nothing objectionable in visi- thought the proposal of the Premier that per- sons wishing to sce a member should obtain a tors getting into the lobby or the Library; but, if there was any harm in it, it was the ticket before being admitted was a great slight to honourable members. What he did object Premier who was responsible for it by. en- couraging deputations of single individuals to to was the want of conveniences for members visit him. If Ministers permitted this, surely of the House to see strangers visiting them on common or " garden " members ought to be as public business, and the appointment of twenty Serjeants-at-Arms would not affect this phase accessible. Mr. SEDDON said time was being wasted of the question. It was for the Government to provide more conveniences for members in this upon a frivolous matter, and matters of im- portance would probably have to be dealt with direction. He also thought sufficient care was when the members who had been occupying not taken, in connection with gentlemen visit- time over minor matters were quietly in their ing the floor of the House, in showing them beds. The statement by the honourable mem- the proper way out of the buildings. He in- ber for Eden was without foundation. He had tended to support the maintenance of the office of Serjeant-at-Arms, and personally he looked never interfered with any officer or servant of to the Premier or Speaker, or whoever had the the House, but officers were appointed on the recommendation of Mr. Speaker. If they were control, to see that the Serjeant-at-Arms car- salaried officers they must be appointed by the ried out his duties to the fullest extent. Government ; that was always so. The officer referred to by the honourable member for parently a number of members, like the member Palmerston was not a parliamentary officer, but for Lyttelton, who thought that the position of Serjeant-at-Arms was a sinecure, but if the the steward of Bellamy's. The office had be- come vacant, and the officer had been selected duties were properly carried out the position by the Government, but was not made until the was a most responsible one. He would read for House Committee met. The appointment had the information of honourable members what May, the great parliamentary authority, had to not been made, as stated, at £300, but at £250, and last year the sum of £350 had been paid as say on the subject :- salary for the same office. Some one of ex- perience was wanted, and the Government had made the appointment, the office never having Her Majesty with addresses. been under Mr. Speaker. As for the fact that the Government had been accessible, and had received numerous deputations introduced by members, it was rather unkind, when this cour- tesy had been extended at much personal incon- venience by Ministers, that members should complain of it as responsible for the disorgani- zation that had been mentioned. With an efficient and capable Serjeant-at-Arms, with definite instructions as to his duties, a good deal of what members complained of would be stopped. Mr. WITHEFORD (Auckland City) said the House Committee were doing their best to pro- vide accommodation for members and their friends. Mr. McGUIRE (Hawera) would not support the abolition of the office of Serjeant-at-Arms. In regard to strangers being introduced to all parts of the House, he thought a large part of the blame lay with Ministers, some of whom could not be interviewed without going through the lobbies. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) said it might be admitted that some of the duties of the Serjeant-at-Arms might be exercised by a messenger, but the Serjeant-at-Arms was the executive officer of the House as between the Speaker and members and the outside public, and he did not think it desirable that the high and important functions laid down as belonging to that officer should be carried out by one of the messengers ; it would not Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) said there was ap- " His duties are to attend the Speaker, with the mace, on entering and leaving the House, or going to the House of Lords, or attending It is his duty to keep the gangway at and below the bar clear, and to desire the members to take their places, and not to stand with their backs to the Chair, nor to stand, nor remove from their places with their hats on when the House is sitting. He takes strangers into custody who are irregularly admitted into the House, or who misconduct themselves there ; causes the removal of per- sons directed to withdraw ; gives orders to the doorkeepers and other officers under him to lock the doors of the House upon a division; in- troduces, with the mace, Peers.and Judges at- tending within the bar and messengers from the Lords ; attends the Sheriffs of London at the bar on presenting petitions ; brings to the bar prisoners to be reprimanded by the Speaker or persons in custody to be examined as wit- nesses. For the better execution of these duties he has a chair close to the bar of the House and is assisted by a Deputy Serjeant. Out of the House he is intrusted with the execution of all warrants for the commitment of persons ordered into custody by the House, and for removing them to the Tower or Newgate, or retaining them in his own custody. He serves by his messengers all orders of the House upon those whom they concern. He also maintains order in the lobby and passages of the House. It is another of the Serjeant's duties to give notice to all Committees when the House is going to prayers. He has the appointment and super- vision of the several officers in his department, 
<page>580</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=600</url>
all its Committee-rooms and other buildings during the sitting of Parliament." Mr. LAURENSON (Lyttelton) asked who it was that had wasted the time of the House ? Those who had wandered over all the earth in discussing the question of the Serjeant-at-Arms. The honourable member for Riccarton had said that we must have some one to perform the functions of Serjeant-at-Arms. Well, let the head messenger perform them. Then, the mem- ber for Kaiapoi and the member for Wairarapa had said that a Serjeant at-Arms was necessary so as to preserve the dignity of Parliament. The dignity of Parliament, forsooth ! If honour- able members were not true to themselves a hundred Serjeants-at-Arms would not maintain the dignity of Parliament. The only way to maintain the dignity of Parliament was by being dignified themselves. He had no patience with those trickeries and gewgaws which only commended themselves to ignorant and unlettered minds. The Premier, in his Financial Statement, had said that excessive expenditure must cease, and this was a most favourable opportunity of putting into practice that precept. The Committee divided on the question, "That the item, ' Serjeant-at-Arms, £200,' be reduced by £1." AYES, 10. Millar Atkinson Tellers. Pirani Hanan Herries Tanner Hutcheson Laurenson. Thomson, J. W. Meredith NOES, 42. Napier Allen, E. G. Hardy O'Meara Haselden Allen, J. Palmer Heke Arnold Parata Hogg Bennet Rhodes Carncross Hornsby Russell, G. W. Houston Carroll Kaihau Seddon Collins Colvin Lang Symes Thompson, R. Ell Lawry Field Lethbridge Ward Witheford. Fisher McGowan Tellers. McGuire Fowlds Buddo Fraser, A. L. D. Mckenzie, R. McNab Graham Massey. Hall-Jones Majority against, 32. Amendment negatived. The Committee divided on the question, "That the item, ' Reader and Clerk of Bills and Papers, $175,' be reduced by £25." AYES, 7. Tellers. Bennet Laurenson Meredith. Buddo Ell Hanan Fisher. NOES, 45. Fraser, A. L. D. Carroll Allen, E. G. Collins Graham Allen, J. Colvin Hall-Jones Arnold Field Hardy Atkinson Fowlds Haselden Bollard Mr. Massey Herries McGuire Symes Hogg Mckenzie, R. Tanner Hornsby McNab Thompson, R. Houston Millar Thomson, J. W. Hutcheson Napier Ward Kaihau Parata Witheford. Pirani Lang Tellers. Rhodes Lawry Carncross Lethbridge Russell, G. W. O'Meara. Massey Majority against, 38. Amendment negatived. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) asked for an ex- planation of the item, "Extra messengers and police during session, £1,400." Mr. SEDDON said there were seventeen mes- sengers receiving 10s. a day, and two boys re- ceiving 5s. a day. The rest was simply the ordinary allowance made to the orderlies under their regulations. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) asked how it was that the £200 additional voted respectively as sessional allowance to the Speaker and Chairman of Committees las: year was not on the estimates this year. Mr. SEDDON said he was waiting to see what the wishes of members were on this question. Was he to take it that members wished him to bring these allowances down ? Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) asked who was the messenger who received the salary of £185. Mr. SEDDON said it was the head messenger. Mr. Lynch. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL said that under the heading "Charwomen " a vote for $50 was taken last year, and #11 was shown as having been expended. That appeared on page 9, and on the next page it was shown that $705 had been expended under the same heading. What was the distinction between the two ? Mr. SEDDON said the £11 had been paid to the charwoman during the recess. . Vote, £4,065, agreed to. General Expenses, £13,952. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) expressed the hope that the small increase in the salaries recommended by the Library Committee would be brought down on the supplementary est :- mates. The Assistant Librarian was getting less than the temporary hands employed, and surely that was not right. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) asked if it was the intention of the Government to divide the duties of the custodian, so that one officer took charge of the buildings and another had charge of Bellamy's. Mr. BUDDO (Kaiapoi) moved, That the salary of the custodian be reduced by £1. He desired to state that, while the accommodation of the library had been greatly improved, there was a great lack of accommodation for persons visiting members on business. If the cus- todian was the controlling authority in the management of the rooms round and about the library, the sooner he got to work the better. So little and so poor was the accommodation 
<page>581</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=601</url>
for members whose constituents came to visit a very costly method by which Hansard was them, that in order to talk business they had printed, when there were two type-setting to walk together in the open air. There was no machines in use in the colony-the linotype, accommodation of any kind available unless which cost £700, and the monotype, which cost members broke through the orders of the from $250 to £300-which would turn out the House and took their friends surreptitiously work at from 4d. to 6d. per thousand ens, as into some of the Committee-rooms. The library compared with 1s. 4d., which was at present staff had the accommodation of two or three being paid in the Government Printing Office. rooms, and he did not know that that was Why the Government, in the Railways and too much for them ; but, that being so, mem- Public Works Departments, should utilise the bers should have more than one small room for latest inventions in machinery and yet retain seventy-four members. He trusted that some in the printing department, for sympathetic authority would take this matter in hand, and reasons, out-of-date methods he could not that reasonable accommodation would be pro- understand. vided for visitors from a distance who desired mitted, to be said from the compassionate to see members on business. point of view that the Premier had taken up ; Mr. HALL- JONES (Minister for Public but he thought the proper course to pursue Works) said two rooms had been originally was for the Government to find some other provided for the use of members. but one had suitable work for the men thrown out of work If the been taken for the Serjeant-at-Arms. by the introduction of the machinery - such as room at present used as a ladies' waiting-room employment as extra clerks and messengers. were taken for the Serjeant-at-Arms, that The present position was opposed to all the would leave two for the use of members, which, principles of political economy and common- he thought, should meet requirements. sense. Mr. GRAHAM (Nelson City) said two rooms would not be sufficient ; there should be four ought to be done in order to provide more at the least. The lack of accommodation pro- accommodation for members transacting busi- vided for members was most inconvenient, ness with their constituents and those who and Ministers, who had ample and comfortable called upon them at the House. He suggested accommodation for themselves, had no concep- that the Serjeant-at-Arms' room and also two tion of the amount of inconvenience members of the rooms at the head of the main stairway should be given them for this purpose. The had to suffer. Mr. WILLIS (Wanganui) said they had been present sitting-room was often occupied by promised ample accommodation when the new strangers who had no member with them at all. building was put up, and yet they were worse off than ever. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) said he certainly honourable member should have addressed his concurred in the remarks of the honourable complaints about the smoking to the Library member for Kaiapoi and the honourable member Committee. for Nelson City. After eleven years in the House he had never seen the House so thoroughly dis- that some weeks ago complaints were made to organized and so much dissatisfaction amongst the Library Committee, or to the House Com- members regarding the accommodation pro- mittee, and the result was no action was taken, vided and the general attention offered to mem- and members were told to smoke where they bers as during the present session of Parliament. liked. He could confirm the statement of the honour- able member for Kaiapoi that the atmosphere must have been misinformed. The Library Committee decided that smoking would be of the one little room placed at the disposal of allowed in the two downstairs rooms, but not members was so vitiated as to be positively in the upstairs room. With regard to accom- unhealthy, and he could not conceive why no modation for members, it seemed not to be provision was made for ventilation when the generally known that after one o'clock mem- room was being constructed. He sincerely bers were at liberty to take their friends to the hoped that this order of things would be Joint Committee-room. That was always open altered, and that members would have less room for complaint in the future. to members now after the Committees had sat. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) wished to It was represented to the Committee that the clerks did their business in the two rooms at ask the Premier if he proposed to follow the precedent of last year, and furnish as far as the head of the stairs which had been referred to by the honourable member for Marsden. possible details of the contingency vote ? Last year a vote of $250 was taken for "Contin- statement of the honourable member for the gencies," and the same sum was asked for this Bay of Plenty. It was by the permission of the year; but the amount spent last year under Library Committee that smoking was permitted "Contingencies " was £926. Mr. SEDDON said this was for shelving for in both the lower rooms. He had never seen a member smoking in the upper room, but he the new books in the library and other extra had been informed of two cases which had been work. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL said the matter he promptly checked by the officers. He joined in the protest about the paucity of the accom- wished particularly to speak about was the item, "Printing of Hansard, £4,600." It was modation for members. There was something, he ad- Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) said something Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) said the Mr. R. THOMPSON (Marsden) understood Mr. HERRIES said the honourable member Mr. TANNER (Avon) wished to confirm the 
<page>582</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=602</url>
vasion of the upper rooms by smokers, it was a violation of the arrangements that had been made, and the responsibility for this rested on those who were in charge. Their duty was to stop the offenders and in doing that they would be supported by the House. With reference to the question of the Committee-rooms, it would be found on examination that some of the clerks had taken possession of some of these rooms, and made themselves comfortable there, when they ought to be given up to the use of members for the reception of their visitors. He had no hesitation in saying if the Speaker, the Chairmen of the Library and House Commit- tees, and himself were empowered to deal with this matter there would soon be plenty of rooms for members. He was quite prepared to assist members in maintaining their just rights and in having the necessary conveniences. After spending all the money they had in improving the building, it seemed they had less con- veniences than before, and the rooms were not so comfortable. All that was wanted now was to make a change, put people in their proper place and let members have their just rights. Touching the question of printing, he would ask the honourable member for Riccarton not to urge him to reply at this stage, as the ques- tion could be better dealt with when they came to discuss the Printing Office estimates. Then, as to contingencies, they had cut down this vote until it was so small that it was scarcely necessary to have a Contingencies list, but he would be prepared to give the fullest informa- tion. The #926 was for clerical assistance in marking, indexing, and shifting the books, and  the reason that only $250 was now asked for was that they had got again into a normal con- dition. The duties of the custodian ought not to be divided. The present arrangement was  #cc-zero temporary, but that would be altered when the new custodian took charge. He did not believe in divided authority, and he would do his best to give the conveniences to which, he thought, members were entitled. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said, notwith- standing the fact that they had now a new building costing $30,000, they had absolutely less convenience than they had had in the old building : but, making due allowance for the in- convenience of the new building, that did not do away with the complaint which had origi- nated the discussion - namely, the want of regularity in the management of the building. He wished the Premier had sole charge of and authority in the matter for forty-eight hours, for he was sure he would within that time effect such a change as was wanted. He hoped the discussion would not end in nothing, and he looked to the Premier to see that the bad management was brought to an end. Mr. WILFORD (Wellington Suburbs) pointed out that the local members suffered from lack of accommodation more than others, as for every constituent outside members required to see they had to see a hundred. In regard to the Library officials, he thought they had a ! good deal to do, and occasionally had to deal entrance of strangers, that were not generally known. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) said it appeared to him that the Library staff were zealous in their duties, and always anxious to consult the convenience of members. So far as the con- veniences of members were concerned he hoped the common-sense views of the Premier would prevail, and that members would have the use of rooms intended for them. Mr. BARCLAY (Dunedin City) said he de- sired to draw the attention of the Premier to the item, " Second assistant in Library, £105." Mr. SEDDON said an increase would be provided for this officer on the supplementary estimates. Vote, £13,952, agreed to. CLASS II .- COLONIAL SECRETARY'S DEPART- MENT. Vote, Clerk of Executive Council, £50, agreed to. Colonial Secretary's Office, £1,640. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) moved, That the item, " Under-Secretary, $500," be reduced by £25, the amount of the present increase. He gave his reasons for taking this course on a previous vote, and would not now detain the House. Sir J. G. WARD (Colonial Secretary) said this was not a high salary for an officer occupy- ing the position of chief executive officer. By comparison with the salary attached to the position in other colonies it was a very low salary. This officer had twenty - nine years' service, and had very important and respon- sible duties. Mr. MILLAR said there were many officers beneath this gentleman who had likewise long service and heavy duties, and he would like to know how many of these men could show an increase. He wanted to know on what prin- ciple the increases were granted ? Sir J. G. WARD said, regarding the latter point, he thought the whole of the services in the colony should be classified, but they had not been able to arrange this up to the pre- sent. What was done now was to judge, as far as possible, by the exigencies of the various offices, and that was the only way that could be adopted in unclassified departments. Mr. WILFORD (Wellington Suburbs) said that the chief officers of the departments seemed to get rises from year to year, but the officers under them very seldom got rises. Was that because the rises were recommended by the heads of the departments ? Sir J. G. WARD .- No. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) said that last year the Minister said, in regard to a question about another officer, that the Government could not recommend a certain increase because the head of the department had not recomended it. In his Financial Statement the Colonial Treasurer said : - "Coming to the demands upon the conscli- dated revenue, the several services of the colony have necessarily increased, and the strictest 
<page>583</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=603</url>
arrives when increased taxation is required to meet the ordinary expenditure, so surely will reductions in salaries eventuate." The time had arrived, but the reductions in salaries had not eventuated. There was nothing to warrant their increasing the salary of any officer receiving over $400; and if things went on at the present rate the time would come when the 10 per cent. reductions of the Atkin- son Administration would be a fool to what would take place. He knew an efficient officer in this department who had been getting under £200 without an increase for seventeen years ; and he believed that if one went through the service he would find that there were many officers in the more poorly paid ranks who had been in the service for a very long time, and had not even had recommendations for a rise given effect to. The reason was that they were not in touch with the Ministers, whilst the heads of the departments were, and so were able to get rises for themselves. A maximum salary ought to be laid down, and the per- sistent increasing of salaries every year on the present system should not be permitted. He of the Committee would object to his wishing would support not only this motion, but motions with regard to striking off every other increase on the estimates. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) protested against doing business -only thirty members being pre- sent to deal with a vote involving £185,000. He had nothing to say against this particular officer, but this was not the time to increase salaries. As a true friend of the Government build up, and that unless they afforded facili- and of the Civil servants he said that we were going too fast. He submitted that if 12.0. succeed. The Government was promoting ex- they allowed this vote to pass without  protest they would be doing wrong. Mr. HORNSBY (Wairarapa) added his pro- test to that of the member for Ashley as to the lack of interest shown by members of the House when dealing with the estimates. Those who attended to this business were outvoted lay this increase at the door of the Civil Service. by those who were not present to hear a word Last year they had taken a census, costing of the discussion. The moment the division- bell rang they came into the House and out- voted and overmastered those who were really non-recurrent items, arising from exceptional doing the business of the country. He agreed with the suggestion made some time ago by the member for Clutha, that the quorum should of the Colonial Secretary's Department. There be raised to one-half the members of the House. so far as annual expenditure was concerned. Sir J. G. WARD might point out, in reply to the honourable member for Dunedin City (Mr. Millar) and the honourable member for suggestion that they should take divisions with- Wellington Suburbs, that the total increases in out delay, and avoid useless discussion, was a good one, as talking was absolutely useless. He salaries on these estimates, outside the classi- fied departments, amounted to £12,121; and presumed the increase of $12,121 referred to by the Minister in charge represented increases in that 802 of these increases, amounting to previously existing salaries only, and did not £ 10,021, represented salaries all under $300 a include the new salaries of a large number year. There were forty-five increases in salaries between £300 and $400, and the total amount of new offices recently created, as, for instance, those in the Public Health Department, was £1,000. There were twenty increases in amounting to £5,984. That being so, what salaries between $400 and £500, and the amount he complained of more particularly was the was £675. In salaries over $500 there were six enormous increase in the number and amount increases, and the amount was £175; and of new salaries, which, together with additions among the heads of departments there were to salaries, amounted to over $45,000. seven increases, and the amount was $250. ! higher salaries could effect a saving of $50,000, as was talked of, he could understand their action ; but in order to effect a reduction of even $2,000 on the whole of the estimates they must of necessity reduce a large number of the smaller salaries under £300, which con- stituted nine-tenths of the whole. As for the Under - Secretary in the Colonial Secretary's Department, whose salary was being increased from $475 to $500, this officer had been twenty- nine years in the service ; his duties required him to be at the office on holidays as well as ordinary days, and to work a great deal of overtime, and the advance of $25 was only fair. He had in his hand the estimates for Victoria, and the officer holding a similar position there was receiving $000 per annum. Mr. FISHER (Wellington City) said the three divisions that had been taken showed the mind of the Committee. He was quite satis- fied that the estimates would not be reduced a single shilling. They could have his vote for the whole estimates; but, as he was not pre- pared to waste his time, he was sure no member the Chairman a cordial Good evening. Mr. MONK (Waitemata) said the Ministry should not have increased the estimates in this class as they had done. Last year they were £127,542; this year, £185,438. As representing the people who had the taxation to pay and the hardships of roadless homes to endure, he would remind them that they had the country to ties for the transport of produce they would not penditure not on requirements most urgently needed. He dreaded the coming of the day when, after they had forced up the salaries of the Civil servants and taught them to expect so much, they would have to cut them down. Sir J. G. WARD said it was quite unfair to £16,000 ; there had been an expenditure on the Royal visit of £50,000, and there were other circumstances which had nothing whatever to do with the Civil Service or the ordinary work was no growth in that particular department, Mr. GRAHAM (Nelson City) thought the  
<page>584</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=604</url>
had long ago expressed his desire to take no in- crease from the small salaries, but was opposed simply to the increases on large salaries. They had been told that eight hundred men had re- ceived increases amounting to $10,000; that was but an increase of $12 10s. on the average, while the average increase on the higher sala- ries was $38. Was that a fair proportion of in- crease ? Then it was said that this officer in Australia received $750 per annum ; but they should also remember that the taxation per head from Customs in Victoria was £1 19s. ; in New South Wales, £1 13s. ; and in New Zealand, $2 17s ; and yet the expenditure was yearly going up. If the population was keep- ing pace with the expenditure they might be able to do it. Mr. SEDDON (Colonial Treasurer) said, No estimates that had ever been brought down to the House had received so much consideration as these had. The increases they contained were due to the abnormal circumstances that had arisen this year. So far as this parti- cular increase was concerned, he would point out that this officer had been in the department for twenty-nine years, and he had seen juniors in other departments given increases by statute while his salary remained the same. No officer in the service had been so backward in pushing his claims for an increase. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) said that there was no particular point attempted to be made against this officer. The point was, that cer- tain members had decided to divide the House on every increase to a head of a department.  They would do this, because the Premier was very fond afterwards of telling members that they were responsible for the increases, be- cause they allowed the estimates to go through without opposition. This particular increase was not so bad as a number of others he could point to. He thought the whole trouble in connection with increases was that the Govern- ment had not tackled the question of the classi- fication of the whole service. Mr. J. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) did not propose to vote for the reduction of any officer's salary, because if he did he might be doing an injustice, and because the responsi- bility for the finances rested with the Premier. The Premier had assured the House that the very greatest care had been exercised in the preparation of these estimates, and, that being so, they must assume that the Ministry saw their way clear to grant these increases. Mr. HOGG (Masterton) said he intended to vote against the whole of these increases where the salary was anything like this amount. He thought $475 was a very good salary for any officer in the big buildings. He did not think the colony was in a position to stand these large salaries. If the heads of departments were in- creased why should not also those who were in subordinate positions be increased proportion- ately ? Unless the increases were to be all round he would oppose them. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) pointed out that under the 1891-92 estimates the total vote for | it was $73,676, whilst the present vote was #185,428. That was sufficient justification for the alarm that was felt by members that the interest of the country was at stake, and to raise their voices against the increases. Mr. COLLINS (Christchurch City) said that the honourable gentleman was hardly honest in his criticism, for it should be remembered that the total vote included the Public Health, the Industries and Commerce, and Tourist De- partments, which did not exist in 1892. With other members, however, he recognised that Parliament was responsible to the public for the expenditure of public money, and, there- fore, he would join with the others in protest- ing against this continuous increase of the higher salaries. The Committee divided on the question, "That the item ' Under-Secretary, £500,' be re- duced by £25." AYES, 19. Monk Arnold Haselden Herries Russell, G. W. Bennet Buddo Hogg Tanner. Collins Hornsby Ell Lethbridge Tellers. Millar Fowlds Massey Meredith Graham Pirani. NOES, 32. Allen, E. G. Houston Palmer Hutcheson Parata Atkinson Rhodes Bollard Kaihau Carroll Seddon Lang Symes Colvin Lawry Thompson, R. Field McGowan Fraser, A. L. D. McGuire Ward Willis. Mckenzie, R. Fraser, W. McNab Tellers. Hall-Jones Napier . Hardy Carncross Witheford. Heke O'Meara Majority against, 13. Amendment negatived. Mr. MILLAR (Dunedin City) moved, That the item "Shorthand and Type-writer (also Private Secretary, £25), £325," be reduced by £25. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) asked if this officer was previously in the Industries Department. Sir J. G. WARD .- No. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) thought they should have more information about this and other increases. If the Minister made out a good case he was willing to support him ; but he did not think the time was opportune for going in for a system of all-round increases. Sir J. G. WARD said this officer (Mr. Andrews) was a Private Secretary, and he also frequently acted as Clerk of the Executive Council, and, as he had also duties thrown upon him quite outside his secretarial work, he was sure mem- bers did not expect an officer to perform duties of an unusual character without recompensing him. The £25 he got as Private Secretary was additional to the £320. Mr. SEDDON said, If this officer were paid overtime he would be entitled to receive about £1,000 a year. 
<page>585</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=605</url>
Amendment negatived. Vote, £1,640, agreed to. Ministers' Secretaries, £800. Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) pointed out that the Secretary to the Cabinet was also getting 1950 as Clerk of the Executive Council. Sir J. G. WARI) said, this was Mr. Willis, who was a very able officer. He was an elderly man, and lived out of town ; and, as not infrequently Executive Council meetings required to be held at night when he was not present, it was then that Mr. Andrews acted in his stead. Mr. PIRANI wanted to know why it was necessary to employ thirteen Private Secre- taries for Ministers. Mr. SEDDON said there really ought to be two sets of Private Secretaries if they were not to be "sweated " and overworked. Mr. HUTCHESON (Wellington City) said that arose from the fact that they had so much work to do that was entirely for the honour and glory of the Premier himself. They were em- ployed in getting out books describing the Premier's native and Island meetings. If they were confined to their proper and legitimate work, half the number of secretaries would suffice. He would support a motion to reduce this item as an instruction to the Premier to curtail and legitimise their work. Mr. WILFORD (Wellington Suburbs) be- lieved the Premier's suggestion to double the number of these Private Secretaries was a proper one. The Premier's work went on night and day, and members themselves would hesi- tate to face that kind of work. Sir J. G. WARD said there was a 1.0.  misapprehension respecting these secre- taries, and he would like to place the facts be- fore honourable members, for then their sense of fairness would suggest that statements had been made that ought not to have been made. There was an impression that Ministers had an unnecessary number of Private Secretaries at. tached to them, but nothing of the kind was the case ; and no extraneous work, such as that suggested, had been imposed upon them, and even if they did do work of that sort it would not make the difference of half a secretary to the whole of the Ministry. It was a fact that not more than two or three secretaries were employed from outside the departments to which they belonged. Previously similar work was done by them, but they remained in the departmont itself, and were not brought into prominence. They had been brought into more prominence in recent years. There was an enormous amount of work which was now thrown upon the Ministers ; but the idea that men were brought in from outside to do it, and that additional expense was thereby en- tailed upon the colony, was quite erroneous. This was a feature of the position that had not been duly recognised. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) understood that there were Private Secretaries connected with the different departments of the public service and members of the Civil Service. The amount mentioned here was only what they were paid or their special services as secretaries, VOL. CXVIII .- 38. but he could not trace in the estimates where these people were employed, or what they re- ceived. Mr. SEDDON said they received from £150 to £300. Two, Mr. Hyde and another, he thought, received a little over £300 a year. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL asked if their salaries were specifically voted as clerks in the different departments to which they belonged. Mr. SEDDON .- Yes ; except those who were not attached to any department. Mr. HERRIES (Bay of Plenty) asked whether those gentlemen were secretaries who had been doing such onerous work as that which they had undertaken on the previous Friday night in taking down the debate in shorthand. If the secretaries had to do such work as that, no wonder they had extra work. Sir J. G. WARD said that during the last fifteen years it was quite usual for check notes to be taken behind the Chair. Mr. HERRIES said, All he could say was that it was a most improper use to make of Private Secretaries, and one that the House should not pay for. Mr. SEDDON said these Private Secretaries had to work long hours, and in some instances they lost their promotions in the departments to which they belonged. He often felt he was doing wrong in keeping them such long hours, and in keeping them employed when other officers had their holidays. They did not com- plain, however, although they had to work late and early; so much so, indeed, that in two cases their health had broken down. He was not hard-hearted, and he had to say that one of two things must happen : either the work must lessen or he must increase the number of Secretaries to do it. It was not at all the class of work that had been spoken of. So far as the Island book was concerned, his Private Secretaries had never touched it ; and with regard to the Native meetings there was something extra in that. Whenever Minis- ters, and particularly His Excellency the Go- vernor, went to a . meeting of Natives and addressed them on important questions, laying down matters of policy which the Natives would keep them to, the Minister, for his own safety and that of the colony, was bound to have a shorthand note taken at the time the speeches were made ; and, as would be seen from the time taken before the book came out, the transcription had been done when his Secretary could devote the time to it. It was not that class of work that troubled him ; but the fact of the matter was that, between despatches, telegrams, letters, correspondence, and the memoranda connected with the con- tingents, defence, and matters of the different departments, the work had enormously in- creased. If a record of this was laid on the table, members would see that the number of Secretaries ought to be increased, and pro- bably they would have some little considera- tion for Ministers. They must get some relief, and the only relief he and his colleagues could get was by the employment of more Private Secretaries. Members would know how their 
<page>586</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=606</url>
increased in volume as compared with what it was even five years ago, and there had been a corresponding increase of work for Ministers and their staff. As they knew, this work had to be done. The old system of red tape would not do; members would not wait for months for replies from the departments, and new and up-to date methods' had to be employed in order to cope with the increase of work. He did not think any exception should be taken as to what had been paid to these secretaries, and, instead of the number being large, he thought that some members of the Ministry ought to have an increased number. Mr. LANG (Waikato) was quite agreeable to the Premier having more secretaries, and thought he should have half a dozen more, and then it might be possible to get a reply from the Premier under six months. Latterly he had sent a letter to the Premier respecting a constituent of his, but he had received no reply. Mr. GRAHAM (Nelson City) said the Com- mittee had no desire to stick this item up ; they only wished to know what the cost of the secretaries was to the country ; the salaries were divided on the estimates, and it was im- possible to allocate them. Mr. SEDDON said each Secretary's salary was shown in the department to which he was attached, and the honourable gentleman would get the information as the different classes were reached. Mr. GRAHAM asked whether all the secre- taries were down on the estimates in this way ?  Mr. SEDDON said, Not all ; one or two were temporary. Mr. MEREDITH (Ashley) wished to say, in regard to the Premier's method of answering correspondence, that he had had a great deal of correspondence with him from the time he had been Minister for Public Works, and had always found him prompt and courteous in his replies. In regard to the item under discussion, he wished to ask what travelling-allowance and expenses were allowed to each secretary ? Sir J. G. WARD said they were allowed 10s. a day, or at the most 15s. If honourable mem- bers wished to go into the general question of travelling-allowances he thought it ought to be done generally, and the criticism ought to apply to every man receiving money in the public service. He did not think it was right to single out one set of men. He would state, for the information of the honourable member for Nelson, that eleven Private Secretaries were shown on the consolidated estimates, one on the public works estimates, and one was tem- porary, making thirteen in all. If the honour- able member would only look through the various pages of the estimates he would find this was so. He did not think any member of the House supposed that $25 was the only salary these officers received. He would tell honourable members how they could get over the private secretary difficulty-namely, instead of sending Ministers twenty and thirty letters daily, they should restrain themselves to a few Mr. Seddon answer their own letters, and dispense with secretaries. But with the present enormous calls made upon Ministers it was impossible for flesh and blood to do the work without assistance. He was quite satisfied there was no Private Secretary who was not earning fully his salary. Mr. MASSEY (Franklin) said they were not attacking Private Secretaries, but simply asking for information. So far as the Private Secre- taries were concerned members were strongly of opinion that they earned every penny they received ; but what members said was, that Ministers compelled their secretaries to do work which they should not be called upon to do. There was, however, other work which the House ought to know something about, and that was the work done in what was jocularly known as the "Pastemaster-General's Depart- ment," where it is said three men are ex- clusively engaged in cutting-out and pasting into the "black-book " extracts from members' speeches to their constituents. He would like to know if that work was done by Ministers' Private Secretaries, or was it a fact that other men were employed for the purpose ; and, if so, where were their salaries provided for ? Mr. PIRANI (Palmerston) said this was rather an interesting question for Ministers to answer, and he did not think they would answer it. The point he raised in reference to Private Secretaries was that, while last year there were only nine this year there were thirteen. Mr. SEDDON .- We had them before, but they were not on the estimates. Mr. PIRANI said it was an extraordinary thing that the Premier admitted that these men were working at all times, and were under- paid ; whilst if a private employer kept one of his hands working overtime the Government by their legislation said he must pay him over- time. He did not object to the salaries, and if an opportunity were given by the Premier a larger sum would he voted. A great deal of work was put upon the Private Secretaries that ought not to be put upon them. If Ministers wanted private work to be done by their Secre- taries, they should pay them for the extra work out of their own pockets. Vote, Ministers' Secretaries, £800, agreed to. Mr. COLLINS moved to report progress. Mr. G. W. RUSSELL (Riccarton) would want, later on, some information about the very large increase in the vote for messengers. Sir J. G. WARD would furnish this infor- mation at once. Last session, when this vote was before the House, members urged an in- crease of 1s. a day to the pay of the messengers and night watchmen. That accounted for the greater portion of the increase. It was done at the instigation of the House itself. The Committee divided on the question, "That progress be reported." AYES, 25. Arnold Bollard Fowlds Buddo Hardy Atkinson Bennet Ell Haselden 
<page>587</page>
<url>https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.32106019788253&seq=607</url>
Russell, G. W. Herries McNab Tanner. Meredith Hornsby Millar Hutcheson Tellers. Monk Lang Pirani Collins Lethbridge Graham. Rhodes Massey NOES, 23. Symes Kaihau Barclay Thompson, R. Lawry Carncross McGowan Ward Carroll Mckenzie, R. Wilford Colvin Willis. Napier Field O'Meara Tellers. Hall-Jones Allen, E. G. Palmer Heke Fraser, A.L. D. Houston Seddon PAIR. Against. For. Fraser, W. Duncan Majority for, 2. Motion agreed to. Progress reported. The House adjourned at a quarter past two o'clock a.m. 